CHAPTER ONE

Search:
Reflecting Consciousness and
Connecting Commerce
Search has become integrated into the fabric of our society. With more than 197.9 billion searches performed worldwide each month as of April 2014, approximately 6.6
billion web searches are performed every day. This means that on average about 7,500
searches are performed every single second of every day.1 In addition, users have
grown to expect that the responses to their search queries will be returned in less than
one second.
If you have ever come across the various “SEO is dead” claims that make the rounds
periodically in the digital marketing world, rest assured: SEO is both alive and well—
and has not, as many feared, been “killed” by social media marketing as a driver of
web traffic. In fact, in November 2014, Twitter announced that by renewing its focus
on SEO, it increased the number of logged-out visitors coming to the site tenfold—
from 7.5 million to 75 million visitors per month.2.
The high demand for search continues because people can now obtain in mere seconds
information that 20 years ago would have required a trip to the library, the use of a
card catalog and the Dewey Decimal System, and a physical search through halls of
printed volumes—a process that could easily have consumed two hours or more.
Through the new channel of search, people can conduct many of their shopping,

1 comScore, “comScore Releases April 2014 U.S. Search Engine Rankings,” May 16, 2014, http://

www.comscore.com/Insights/Market-Rankings/comScore-Releases-April-2014-US-Search-EngineRankings.
2 Danny Sullivan, “Twitter: Renewed Focus On SEO Generated 10 Times More Visitors,” November
12, 2014, http://searchengineland.com/twitter-seo-more-visitors-208160.

41

www.it-ebooks.info

banking, and social transactions online—something that has changed the way our
global population lives and interacts.
This dramatic shift in behavior represents what investors like to label a disruptive
event—an event that has changed something in a fundamental way. Search engines
have been at the center of this disruptive event, and having a business’s website content appear prominently in the search engines when people are looking for the service, product, or resource that business provides is critical to its survival. As is the case
with most paths to success, obtaining such prime search result real estate is not a simple matter, but it is one that this book aims to deconstruct and demystify as we examine, explain, and explore the ever-changing art of search engine optimization (SEO).

The Mission of Search Engines
Web searchers are free to use any of the many available search engines to find what
they are seeking, so the burden is on the search engines to develop a relevant, fast,
and fresh search experience. For the most part, search engines accomplish this by
being perceived as having the most relevant results and delivering them the fastest, as
users will go to the search engine they think will get them the answers they want in
the least amount of time.
As a result, search engines invest a tremendous amount of time, energy, and capital in
improving their relevance. This includes performing extensive studies of user responses to their search results, comparing their results against those of other search
engines, conducting eye-tracking and click-through rate studies (discussed later in this
chapter), and constructing PR and marketing campaigns.
Search engines generate revenue primarily through paid advertising. The great majority of this revenue comes from a pay-per-click (or cost-per-click) model, in which the
advertisers pay only for users who click on their ads. Because the search engines’ success depends so greatly on the relevance of their search results, manipulations of
search engine rankings that result in nonrelevant results (generally referred to as
spam) are dealt with very seriously. Each major search engine employs a team of people who focus solely on finding and eliminating spam from their search results (generally referred to as “web spam” teams). This matters to SEO professionals because they
need to be careful that the tactics they employ will not be considered spam by the
search engines, as this would carry the risk of incurring penalties for the websites they
work on.

42

CHAPTER ONE: SEARCH: REFLECTING CONSCIOUSNESS AND CONNECTING COMMERCE

www.it-ebooks.info

The Market Share of Search Engines
Figure 1-1 shows the U.S. market share for search engines in June 2015, according to
comScore. As you can see, Google is the dominant search engine on the Web in the
United States.

Figure 1-1. Search engine market share (June 2015)

In many European countries, the disparity is even greater. However, in some markets,
Google is not dominant. In China, for instance, Baidu is the leading search engine. The
fact remains, however, that in most world markets, a heavy focus on Google is a smart
strategy for SEO.

The Human Goals of Searching
The basic goal of a human searcher is to obtain information relevant to a specific set of
keywords and/or phrases entered into a search field, also known as a query. A
searcher may formulate the query as a question, but the vast majority of searches are
performed by users simply entering word combinations—leaving the search engines to
do the work of determining “intent.” One of the most important elements to building
an SEO strategy for a website is developing a thorough understanding of the psychology of your target audience, and how they use words and concepts to obtain information about the services and/or products you provide. Once you understand how the
average searcher—and, more specifically, your target market—utilizes query-based
search engines, you can more effectively reach and keep those users.
Search engine usage has evolved over the years, but the primary principles of conducting a search remain largely unchanged. Most search engine use consists of the following steps:

THE MARKET SHARE OF SEARCH ENGINES

www.it-ebooks.info

43

1. Users experience the need for information. They may be looking for information
on a specific website, and they will search for that website (a navigational query);
they might want to buy something (a transactional query); or they might want to
learn something (an informational query). We will discuss this in more detail in
the following section.
2. Users formulate that need using a string of words and phrases (comprising the
query). Most people formulate their queries in one to three words, though as
users are becoming more web savvy, they may use longer queries to generate
more specific results more quickly. Table 1-1 gives a more detailed look at the percentages of searches per query length as of April 2014, the most recent comScore
study on this aspect of search.
3. Users execute the query, check the results, and if they seek additional information, will try a refined query.
Table 1-1. Searches by query length (comScore, April 2014 data)
Words

Percent of searches

1

25.8%

2

22.8%

3

18.7%

4

13.2%

5+

19.5%

When this process results in the satisfactory completion of a task, a positive experience
is created for the user, the search engine, and the site providing the information or
result.

Who Searches and What Do They Search For?
comScore reported that the number of search queries performed worldwide on the
Web was approximately 197.9 billion across all search engines in April 2014.
comScore data also shows over 1.7 billion people were using a search engine on a
given day in that month. Search engine users in the United States were slightly more
likely to be women than men (50.3% versus 49.7%). According to comScore, about
two-thirds of U.S. Internet users had an income of $40,000 or more (Table 1-2).
Table 1-2. Internet users by household income (May 2015)

44

U.S. household income

Internet users

Less than $25,000

33,730 (13.2%)

$25,000–$39,999

32,941 (12.9%)

CHAPTER ONE: SEARCH: REFLECTING CONSCIOUSNESS AND CONNECTING COMMERCE

www.it-ebooks.info

U.S. household income

Internet users

$40,000–$59,999

42,376 (16.5%)

$60,000–$74,999

27,861 (10.9%)

$75,000–$99,999

38,166 (14.9%)

$100,000 or more

81,015 (31.6%)

You can find additional data from studies, surveys, and white papers on Search Engine
Land’s Search Behavior page.
All of this research data leads us to some important conclusions about web search and
marketing through search engines. For example:
• Search is a major source of valuable, targeted traffic.
• Google is the dominant search player in most world markets.
• Users tend to use shorter search phrases, but these are gradually getting longer,
especially for non-navigational queries.
• Search covers all types of markets.
Search is undoubtedly still one of the best and most important ways to reach consumers and build a business, regardless of that business’s size, reach, or focus.

Determining Searcher Intent: A Challenge for Search
Marketers and Search Engines
Good marketers are empathetic, and smart SEO practitioners—as well as the search
engines—share the goal of providing searchers with results that are relevant to their
queries. Therefore, a crucial element to building an online marketing strategy around
SEO and organic (sometimes referred to as “natural”) search visibility is understanding
your audience and how they think about, discuss, and search for your service, product, and brand.
Search engine marketers need to be aware that search engines are tools—resources
driven by intent toward a content destination. Using the search box is fundamentally
different from entering a URL into the browser’s address bar, clicking on a bookmark,
or clicking on a link to go to a website. Searches are performed with intent—the user
wants to find specific information, rather than just land on it by happenstance; search
is also different from browsing, or clicking around links on a web page. Because of this
specificity, search traffic is generally of higher value to marketers than these other
types of web traffic.
What follows is an examination of the different types of search queries and their categories, characteristics, and processes.

DETERMINING SEARCHER INTENT: A CHALLENGE FOR SEARCH MARKETERS AND SEARCH ENGINES

www.it-ebooks.info

45

Navigational Queries
Users perform navigational searches with the intent of going directly to a specific website. In some cases, the user may not know the exact URL, and the search engine
serves as the “White Pages.” Figure 1-2 shows an example of a navigational query.

Figure 1-2. Navigational query

Opportunities: Pull searcher away from destination; get ancillary or investigatory traffic.
Average traffic value: Very high when searches are for the publisher’s own brand. These
types of searches tend to lead to very high conversion rates. However, these searchers
are already aware of the company brand, and some percentage of these queries may
not represent new customers. For brands other than the one being searched on, the
click-through rates will tend to be low, but this may represent an opportunity to take a
customer away from a competitor.

Informational Queries
Informational searches involve an incredibly broad range of queries. Consider the
many types of information people might look for: local weather, driving directions, a
celebrity’s recent interview, disease symptoms, self-help information, how to train for
a specific type of career...the possibilities are as endless as the human capacity for
thought. Informational searches are primarily non-transaction-oriented (although
they can include researching information about a product or service); the information
itself is the goal, and no interaction beyond clicking and reading is required for the
searcher’s query to be satisfied. Figure 1-3 shows an example of an informational
query.

46

CHAPTER ONE: SEARCH: REFLECTING CONSCIOUSNESS AND CONNECTING COMMERCE

www.it-ebooks.info

Figure 1-3. Informational query

Opportunities: Brand searchers with positive impressions of your site, information, company, and so on; attract inbound links; receive attention from journalists/researchers;
potentially convert to sign up or purchase.
Average traffic value: The searcher may not be ready to buy anything just yet, or may
not even have a long-term intent to buy anything, so the value tends to be “medium”
at best. However, many of these searchers will later enter in a more targeted search,
and this represents an opportunity to capture mindshare with those potential customers. For example, informational queries that are focused on researching commercial
products or services can have high value.

Transactional Queries
Transactional searches don’t necessarily have to involve a credit card or immediate
financial transaction. Creating a Pinterest account, signing up for a free trial account at
DomainTools, or finding the best local Japanese restaurant for dinner tonight are all
transactional queries. Figure 1-4 shows an example of a transactional query.

DETERMINING SEARCHER INTENT: A CHALLENGE FOR SEARCH MARKETERS AND SEARCH ENGINES

www.it-ebooks.info

47

Figure 1-4. Transactional query

Opportunities: Achieve transaction (financial or other).
Average traffic value: Very high.
Research from Pennsylvania State University and the Queensland University of Technology shows that more than 80% of searches are informational in nature, and only
about 10% of searches are navigational or transactional.3
The researchers went further and developed an algorithm to automatically classify
searches by query type. When they tested the algorithm, they found that it was able to
correctly classify queries 74% of the time. The difficulty in classifying the remaining
queries was vague user intent—that is, the queries could have multiple meanings.

Adaptive Search
The search engines also look at sequences of search queries to determine intent. This
was confirmed in coauthor Eric Enge’s interview with Jack Menzel, Product Management Director for Google Search. You can verify this by trying search sequences such
as a search on Rome followed by a search on hotels.
Normally, a search on hotels would not include results for hotels in Rome, but when
the preceding query was for Rome, some results for hotels in Rome will be included.
Keeping track of users’ previous search queries and taking them into account when
determining which results to return for a new query—known as adaptive search—is
intended to help the search engines get a better sense of a user’s intent. The search
engines need to do this with care: excessive changes to the results they return based

3 Bernard J. Jansen, Danielle L. Booth, and Amanda Spink, “Determining the Informational, Navi-

gational, and Transactional Intent of Web Queries,” Information Processing and Management 44
(2008) 1251–1266, http://bit.ly/jansen_user_intent.

48

CHAPTER ONE: SEARCH: REFLECTING CONSCIOUSNESS AND CONNECTING COMMERCE

www.it-ebooks.info

on recent query history are likely to lead to problems, so usually these types of
changes are fairly limited in scope. Nonetheless, it is useful to be aware of the types of
sequences of searches that users go through in their quest for information.

Searcher Intent
When you are building keyword research charts for clients or on your own sites, it can
be incredibly valuable to determine the intent of each of your primary keywords.
Table 1-3 shows some examples.
Table 1-3. Sample search queries and intent
Term

Queries

Intent

Monetary value

Beijing Airport

980

Nav

Low

Hotels in Xi’an

2,644

Info

Mid

7-Day China tour package

127

Trans

High

Sichuan jellyfish recipe

53

Info

Low

This type of analysis can help you determine where to place ads and where to concentrate content and links.
Hopefully, this data can help you to think carefully about how to serve different kinds
of searchers based on their individual intents, and how to concentrate your efforts in
the best possible areas.
Although informational queries are less likely to immediately convert into sales, this
does not mean you should forgo pursuing rankings on these queries; getting your
informative content in front of users seeking information can be incredibly valuable,
and can turn users into potential customers. If you are able to build a relationship with
users who find your site after an informational query, they may be more likely to
come to you to make a related purchase at a later date, and they may also decide to
share your information with others via their own website, or through social media
engagement—an indirect but potentially more valuable result than converting the single user into a paying customer.
One problem in search is that when most searchers formulate their search queries,
their input is limited to just a handful of words (generally one to four). Because most
people don’t have a keen understanding of how search engines work, they often provide queries that are too general or that are presented in a way that does not provide
the search engine (or the marketer) with what it needs to determine, with 100% accuracy 100% of the time, their specific intent. Additionally, search engine users may not
have a specific intent for an individual search query beyond “curiosity” about a
general trending topic, or subject matter. While this poses potential difficulty in delivering relevant results, it also poses great opportunity to capture the mind of someone

DETERMINING SEARCHER INTENT: A CHALLENGE FOR SEARCH MARKETERS AND SEARCH ENGINES

www.it-ebooks.info

49

who may not know what he is looking for, specifically, but who takes an interest in
the subsequent variety of results the search engine (and search marketers) deliver in
response.
These types of general queries are important to most businesses because they often get
the brand and site on the searcher’s radar, and this initiates the process of building
trust with the user. Over time, the user will move on to more specific searches that are
more transactional or navigational in nature.
If, for instance, companies buying pay-per-click (PPC) search ads bought only the
high-converting navigational and transactional terms and left the informational ones
to competitors, they would lose market share to those competitors. Over the course of
several days, a searcher may start with digital cameras, hone in on Olympus OMD, and
then ultimately buy from the store that showed up in her search for digital cameras and
pointed her in the direction of the Olympus OMD model.
Given the general nature of how query sessions start, though, determining intent is
quite difficult, and it can result in searches being performed where the user does not
find what he wants—even after multiple tries. A July 2013 study conducted by ForeSee for the American Customer Satisfaction Index (ACSI) found that 77% of Google
users and 76% of Bing users were satisfied with their experiences.
While 77% satisfaction is an amazing accomplishment given the complexity of building a search engine, this study still showed that more than 22% of users were not satisfied with their search results; additionally, these numbers represent the lowest levels
of customer satisfaction with search engines since 2003, and could reflect users’ dissatisfaction with the number of ads that are infiltrating search engine results pages (SERPs).
Greg Sterling of Search Engine Land provides a broad analysis of these issues (for the
full discussion, see “Google Gets Lowest Score Ever in Customer Satisfaction Survey”).
It will be interesting to see how these satisfaction numbers evolve over time. The
important takeaway here is that in all instances, it is still difficult to determine exactly
a searcher’s intent; and when the searcher’s intent is broad, there is ample opportunity
to leverage your content assets with SEO.
As an SEO practitioner, you should be aware that some of the visitors that you succeed
in attracting to your site may have arrived for the wrong reasons (i.e., they were really
looking for something else), and these visitors are not likely to help your business
goals. Part of your task as an SEO is to maintain a high level of relevance in the content placed on the pages you manage, to help minimize this level of waste—while still
attempting to maximize SERP “mindshare” and gain brand exposure.

50

CHAPTER ONE: SEARCH: REFLECTING CONSCIOUSNESS AND CONNECTING COMMERCE

www.it-ebooks.info

How People Search
Search engines invest significant resources into understanding how people use search,
enabling them to produce better (i.e., faster, fresher, and more relevant) search engine
results. For website publishers, the information regarding how people use search can
be used to help improve the usability of a site as well as search engine compatibility.
User interactions with search engines can also be multistep processes, as indicated in
the user search session documented by Microsoft and shown in Figure 1-5.

Figure 1-5. Merrell shoes user search session

In this sequence, the user performs five searches over a 55+ minute period before
making a final selection. The user is clearly trying to solve a problem and works at it in
a persistent fashion until the task is done.
Marin Software provided us with data on one consumer durable retailer (whose products represent high-cost, considered purchases) for whom 50% of the orders involved
more than 10 clicks leading up to the conversion event.
For this particular retailer, when you look at the number of different ad groups that
were clicked on in those 10 clicks, the clicks were mostly on the same keyword. In
fact, for more than 75% of all conversions that came from multiple paid clicks, all the
clicks were from the same ad group. Only 7% of conversions came from three different ad groups (and none from more than that).

HOW PEOPLE SEARCH

www.it-ebooks.info

51

Table 1-4 shows the average delay between the first click received by the site and the
resulting purchase for this example retailer.
Table 1-4. Delay between first click and purchases
Delay between first click and purchases

Percentage of users

Same day

50%

2–7 days

9%

8–30 days

12%

31–90 days

26%

More than 90 days

3%

This behavior pattern indicates that people are thinking about their tasks in stages. As
in our Merrell shoes example in Figure 1-5, people frequently begin with a general
term and gradually get more specific as they get closer to their goal. They may also try
different flavors of general terms. In Figure 1-5, it looks like the user did not find what
she wanted when she searched on Merrell shoes, so she then tried discount Merrell shoes.
You can then see her refine her search, until she finally settles on Easy Spirit as the
type of shoe she wants.
This is just one example of a search sequence, and the variety is endless. Figure 1-6
shows another search session, once again provided courtesy of Microsoft.
In this search session, the user has a health concern. This particular user starts with a
five-word search, which suggests that she may have some experience using search
engines. At 3:01, her search on headache pregnant 3rd trimester leads her to Yahoo!
Answers. After visiting this site, the user suddenly gets more specific in her search.
She begins to focus on gestational diabetes, perhaps because something she saw on
Yahoo! Answers led her to believe she may have it. The session culminates in a search
for first signs of gestational diabetes, which suggests that she has concluded that this is
quite possibly the issue she is facing.
The session stops there. It may be that at this point the user feels she has learned what
she can. Perhaps her next step is to go to her doctor with her concerns, prepared to
ask a number of questions based on what she has learned.

52

CHAPTER ONE: SEARCH: REFLECTING CONSCIOUSNESS AND CONNECTING COMMERCE

www.it-ebooks.info

Figure 1-6. Health user search session

Our next search session example begins with a navigational search, where the user
simply wants to locate the travel website Orbitz.com (see Figure 1-7). The user’s stay
there is quite short, and she progresses to a search on Cancun all inclusive vacation packages. Following that, she searches on a few specific resorts and finally settles on cancun
riviera maya hotels, after which it appears she may have booked her hotel—the final site
visited on that search is for Occidental Hotels & Resorts, and the direction of her
searches changes after that.

HOW PEOPLE SEARCH

www.it-ebooks.info

53

Figure 1-7. Travel user search session

At that point, the user begins to look for things to do while she is in Cancun. She conducts a search for cancun theme park and then begins to look for information on xcaret, a
well-known eco park in the area.
Users traverse countless different scenarios when they are searching for something.
These example search sessions represent traditional desktop interactions.
Recent data from mobile search shows different behavior for mobile searchers, who
are more likely to be close to completing a transaction. Data from a May 2011 eMarketer study showed that 55% of people visited a business they found in the search
results after searching for information on their smartphone devices. Search engines do
a lot of modeling of these different types of scenarios to enable them to provide better

54

CHAPTER ONE: SEARCH: REFLECTING CONSCIOUSNESS AND CONNECTING COMMERCE

www.it-ebooks.info

results to users. The SEO practitioner can benefit from a basic understanding of
searcher behavior as well. We will discuss this in more detail in Chapter 2.

How Search Engines Drive Ecommerce
People make use of search engines for a wide variety of purposes, with some of the
most popular being to research, locate, and buy products. Ecommerce sales reported
by the U.S. Census Bureau were a healthy $80.3 billion in the first quarter of 2015.4
Forrester Research forecasts that U.S. ecommerce retail sales will reach $370 billion by
2017, outpacing sales growth at brick-and-mortar stores, as shown in Figure 1-8.

Figure 1-8. Forrester Research online retail forecast to 2017

It is important to note that search and offline behavior have a heavy degree of interaction, with search playing a growing role in driving offline sales. In April 2014, Google,
in an effort to solve the online search/offline conversion attribution dilemma,
announced the launch of a pilot program within its AdWords system called “In-Store
Attribution Transaction Reporting,” teaming up with large data providers Axciom
Corp. and DataLogix Holdings Inc. to combine cookie data with offline personal information databases. It will be interesting to see how this program performs, and to what
extent it helps search marketers close the attribution gap between search and brickand-mortar conversions.

4 U.S. Census Bureau News, “Quarterly Retail E-Commerce Sales, 1st Quarter 2015,” May 15, 2015,

http://bit.ly/ecommerce_q1_2015.

HOW SEARCH ENGINES DRIVE ECOMMERCE

www.it-ebooks.info

55

The Mobile Shift
In March 2015, eMarketer published a study showing that mobile advertising spend
continues to increase at the expense of desktop advertising, and projects that by 2019,
mobile ad spending will rise to $65.87 billion, or 72.2% of total U.S. digital advertising
spend.5 Figure 1-9 shows the steep upward trend projection of mobile ad spend
through 2019, reflecting consumers’ increasing use of mobile devices and tablets for
search—and search marketers are taking notice.

Figure 1-9. eMarketer projected mobile ad spending through 2019

The History of Eye Tracking: How Users Scan
Results Pages
Way back in 2006, research firm Enquiro (now called Mediative) conducted heat-map
testing with search engine users that produced fascinating results related to what users
see and focus on when engaged in search activity.6 Figure 1-10 depicts a heat map
showing a test performed on Google; the graphic indicates that users spent the most
amount of time focusing their eyes in the upper-left area, where shading is the darkest. This has historically been referred to in search marketing as the “Golden Triangle.”

5 eMarketer, “Mobile Will Account for 72% of US Digital Ad Spend by 2019: Consumer Usage and

Better Ad Formats Drive Dollars to Mobile Apps,” March 24, 2015, http://bit.ly/mobile_ad_spend.
6 Mediative, published by Enquiro Search Solutions. “Eye Tracking Report 2: Google, MSN, and

Yahoo! Compared!” November 2006, http://bit.ly/eye_tracking_paper.

56

CHAPTER ONE: SEARCH: REFLECTING CONSCIOUSNESS AND CONNECTING COMMERCE

www.it-ebooks.info

Figure 1-10. Enquiro eye-tracking results, 2006

This particular study perfectly illustrated how little attention has traditionally been
paid to results lower on the page versus those higher up, and how users’ eyes are
drawn to bold keywords, titles, and descriptions in the organic results versus the paid
search listings, which receive comparatively little attention. It also showed that different physical positioning of on-screen search results resulted in different user eyetracking patterns. When viewing a standard Google results page, users tended to create
this “F-shaped” pattern with their eye movements, focusing first and longest on the
upper-left corner of the screen, then moving down vertically through the first two or
three results, across the page to the first paid page result, down another few vertical
results, and then across again to the second paid result. (This study was done only on
left-to-right language search results—results for Chinese, Hebrew, and other non-leftto-right-reading languages would be different.)
In May 2008, Google introduced Universal Search (discussed in more detail in Chapter 10), which was a move from simply showing the 10 most relevant web pages
(referred to as “10 blue links”) to showing other types of media, such as videos,
images, news results, and so on, as part of the results of a basic web search. The other
search engines followed suit within a few months, and the industry now refers to this
general concept as blended search.
Blended search created more of a chunking effect of user eye attention, with the focus
“chunks” hovering over various rich media objects such as images or video. Understandably, our eyes are drawn to the image first, then to the text beside it to see
whether it corresponds to the image or video thumbnail. Based on an updated

THE HISTORY OF EYE TRACKING: HOW USERS SCAN RESULTS PAGES

www.it-ebooks.info

57

eye-tracking study published by Enquiro in September 2007, Figure 1-11 shows what
the eye-tracking pattern on a blended search page looked like.

Figure 1-11. Enquiro eye-tracking results, blended search, 2007

A January 2011 study performed by User Centric7 showed similar results, as shown in
Figure 1-12.

Figure 1-12. User Centric eye-tracking results, 2011

In 2010, Enquiro investigated the impact of Google Instant on search usage and attention, noting that for queries in its study:

7 Aga Bojko, “Eye Tracking Bing Vs. Google: A Second Look,” GfK Insights Blog, January 27, 2011,

http://blog.gfk.com/2011/01/eye-tracking-bing-vs-google-a-second-look/.

58

CHAPTER ONE: SEARCH: REFLECTING CONSCIOUSNESS AND CONNECTING COMMERCE

www.it-ebooks.info

• Percent of query typed decreased in 25% of the tasks, with no change in the
others.
• Query length increased in 17% of the tasks, with no change in the others.
• Time to click decreased in 33% of the tasks and increased in 8% of the tasks.
In more recent studies, we can see how the continuously changing search results are
shifting how users focus on a results page.
In October 2012, Mediative conducted a new eye-tracking study analyzing the areas of
attention on Google Maps results pages for locally targeted searches, and as with a
Google web search results page, users’ eyes were most drawn to the topmost search
result, as shown in Figure 1-13.

Figure 1-13. Mediative eye-tracking results, 2012

A more recent study by Mediative, issued in 2014, called “The Evolution of Google
Search Results Pages and Their Effect on User Behavior” shows us a fascinating progression away from the “Golden Triangle” as the search results—as well as search platforms (mobile!)—evolve. Figure 1-14 is the heatmap from this study for an updated
Google SERP showing how user attention is moving more vertically than horizontally.
Some have theorized that this shift in attention is due to the increased adoption of
mobile search by mobile device users, while others think that the ever-changing SERP
makeup that pushes the “blue text link” results lower on the page (e.g., the increase in
the number prominence and content of top-of-page paid search ads, as well as universal and local listings for various queries) is contributing to this change.

THE HISTORY OF EYE TRACKING: HOW USERS SCAN RESULTS PAGES

www.it-ebooks.info

59

Figure 1-14. Google SERP eye-tracking results, 2014: users have moved from horizontal to
vertical scanning

Another notable trend in user eye attention is that because the #1 organic site’s actual
position on the SERP is moving lower, sites that are positioned lower on the results
page are seeing more click activity than in years past—making ranking in organic sites
at these lower positions more valuable than in the past as well. Figure 1-15 highlights
the increased attention being placed lower on the page.

60

CHAPTER ONE: SEARCH: REFLECTING CONSCIOUSNESS AND CONNECTING COMMERCE

www.it-ebooks.info

Figure 1-15. Google SERP, eye-tracking results, 2014: lower SERPs get more attention

These types of studies are a vivid reminder of how important search engine results
pages really are. And, as the eye-tracking research demonstrates, as search engines—
and therefore search results—continue to evolve, users’ search and engagement patterns will follow suit. There will be more items on the page for searchers to focus on,
more ways for searchers to remember and access the search listings, and more
interactive, location-based delivery methods and results layouts—which will keep

THE HISTORY OF EYE TRACKING: HOW USERS SCAN RESULTS PAGES

www.it-ebooks.info

61

changing as other search environments and platforms, such as mobile, continue to
evolve.
Figure 1-16 shows a “Mega SERP” published by Moz: a display of the current universe
of potential results within a Google SERP.

Figure 1-16. Moz mega-SERP

Click Tracking: How Users Click on Results (Organic
Versus Paid)
By now, you should be convinced that you want your site content to be prominently
displayed within SERPs. It never hurts to be #1 in the organic search results.
In contrast, data shows that you may not want to be #1 in the paid search results,
because the resulting cost to gain the #1 position in a PPC campaign can reduce the

62

CHAPTER ONE: SEARCH: REFLECTING CONSCIOUSNESS AND CONNECTING COMMERCE

www.it-ebooks.info

total net margin on your campaign. A study released by AdGooroo in June 20088
found that:
Bidding for top positions usually makes financial sense only for high-budget,
brand-name advertisers. Most other advertisers will find the optimal position
for the majority of their keywords to lie between positions 5–7.
Of course, many advertisers may seek the #1 position in paid search results, for a
number of reasons. For example, if they have a really solid backend on their website
and are able to make money when they are in the #1 position, they may well choose
to pursue it. Nonetheless, the data from the survey suggests that there are many
organizations for which being #1 in paid search does not make sense.
Even if your organic ranking is #1, you can still increase the ranking page’s click rate
by having a sponsored ad above it or in the righthand column. The AdGooroo survey
showed that having a prominent paid ad on the same search results page makes your
#1 organic ranking receive as much as 20% more clicks.

Distribution of Search Results and Traffic
To start breaking this down a bit, Figure 1-17 shows the screen real estate occupied by
the two types of search results. This screenshot was taken prior to Google’s January
2012 “Search, plus Your World” announcement, but it’s the type of screen layout
related to studies that will help you understand which portions of the search results
receive the most clicks.
This example from Google shows how the paid results appear above and to the right of
the organic search results. Note that Google often does not show paid results above the
organic results, in which case the paid results show up only on the right.
Your position in the results has a huge impact on the traffic you will receive. Studies
on the impact of SERP position have shown widely varying results, but do agree that
the advantage of higher positions is significant.

8 AdGooroo, “Research Update: How Keyword Length and Ad Position Impact Clickthrough Rate

and Cost-per-click on Google Adwords”. June 2008.

CLICK TRACKING: HOW USERS CLICK ON RESULTS (ORGANIC VERSUS PAID)

www.it-ebooks.info

63

Figure 1-17. Paid and organic search results

In 2013, Catalyst Search Marketing published the most recent comprehensive study of
Google CTR (click-through rate), which shows CTR data for both desktop and mobile
searches, as well as for branded and unbranded searches.9 In this study, Catalyst found
that the top four Google SERP positions received 83% of first-page organic clicks, and
that 48% of searches result in a first-page organic click. Table 1-5 shows the average
CTR (percentage of clicks received) by Google SERP position.

9 Catalyst, “Google CTR Study,” http://www.catalystsearchmarketing.com/pubs/google-ctr-study/.

64

CHAPTER ONE: SEARCH: REFLECTING CONSCIOUSNESS AND CONNECTING COMMERCE

www.it-ebooks.info

Table 1-5. Google CTR by position
Average position

Average CTR

1.00

17.16

2.00

9.94

3.00

7.64

4.00

5.31

5.00

3.50

6.00

1.63

7.00

1.09

8.00

1.04

9.00

0.44

10.00

0.51

This data provides insight around platform CTR differentiators (desktop versus
mobile), searcher intent CTR differentiators (branded versus unbranded), and query
length CTR differentiators (one, two, three, and four-plus-word query data).
In Table 1-6, you can see that the more refined a user’s search query is—that is, the
more words used in the query—the greater the likelihood that the user will click on
search results farther down the page.
Table 1-6. Google CTR by position and query length
Average position

One word

Two words

Three words

Four+ words

1.00

17.68

16.32

16.28

18.76

2.00

4.41

8.30

10.58

12.41

3.00

3.56

6.86

7.93

8.64

4.00

1.50

4.10

5.12

6.38

5.00

1.86

2.64

3.61

4.11

6.00

0.37

1.10

1.60

2.18

7.00

0.00

1.08

1.12

1.36

8.00

0.00

1.13

1.45

0.84

9.00

0.08

0.52

0.36

0.53

10.00

0.44

0.42

0.54

0.62

As the search engines, search engine results pages, and searcher behavior evolve, the
practice of search engine optimization must evolve in tandem.

CLICK TRACKING: HOW USERS CLICK ON RESULTS (ORGANIC VERSUS PAID)

www.it-ebooks.info

65

Conclusion
Search has penetrated the very fabric of global society. The way people learn, work,
share, play, shop, research, socialize, and interact has changed forever, and organizations, causes, brands, charities, individuals—almost all entities—need to have an Internet presence of some kind, and they need the search engines and search functionality
within all platforms to generate exposure and facilitate engagement. As our society
moves ever closer to a professional consumer (“prosumer”) economy, the ways in
which people create, publish, distribute, and ultimately find information and resources
on the Web will continue to be of great importance. This book will investigate further
just how search, and therefore search engine optimization, is at the center of the web
ecosystem and thus is your key to success in the ever-evolving digital economy.

66

CHAPTER ONE: SEARCH: REFLECTING CONSCIOUSNESS AND CONNECTING COMMERCE

www.it-ebooks.info

