CHAPTER EIGHT

How Social Media and User
Data Play a Role in Search
Results and Rankings
Search engines continually seek to improve the relevance of their search results. They
do this by tuning the weight and mix of the types of ranking signals they currently
employ, or by implementing new signals. However, how they use these signals is
changing all the time. Starting in 2010, evidence mounted to suggest an increasing
weight on ranking signals from social media sources. In December 2010, Google and
Bing both confirmed this in response to questions from SearchEngineLand.com editor
Danny Sullivan.1
However, the way the search engines use social signals has changed significantly since
then, and it currently appears that neither Google or Bing use them as a direct ranking
factor, although they can impact personalized search results in Google.
Although the search engines obscure how their algorithms work, many people believe
that user engagement signals are part of these algorithms, and there has long been a
debate over whether search engines have treated these signals as ranking factors.
While search engine algorithms continue to evolve rapidly, adding new types of ranking signals to them is a tricky process that requires a tremendous amount of testing. As
we discussed in Chapter 2, the Web consists of hundreds of trillions of pages with fundamental differences in their construction and content. In addition, the needs these
pages serve, and the ways that users interact with them, are equally varied.

1 Danny Sullivan, “What Social Signals Do Google & Bing Really Count?”, Search Engine Land,

December 1, 2010, http://searchengineland.com/what-social-signals-do-google-bing-really-count-55389.

539

www.it-ebooks.info

Search engines generally perform many levels of testing of new algorithms, including
live tests with a small portion of their users prior to any general release of new ranking
factors; you can read more about all the stages of testing in this interview with
Google’s Director of Research, Peter Norvig. In the same interview, Norvig suggests
that Google makes two to three algorithm changes per day. This means change is a
constant.
The key to success in search engine rankings is to remember the fundamental goal of
the search engines: to increase market share by providing the best possible (i.e., most
relevant and engaging) results for end users. Astute Internet marketers who understand this will focus on providing high-quality website content and experiences for
their visitors.

Correlation Between Social Signals and Google
Rankings
In 2013, Moz did a study that showed a strong correlation between Google +1s and
rankings in Google. The detailed results are shown in Figure 8-1.

Figure 8-1. Moz correlation study

Searchmetrics performed its own correlation study. As shown in Figure 8-2, the results
showed a very strong correlation between many different types of social signals and
search ranking. In fact, 7 of the top 10 factors correlating with ranking were related to
social media sites.

540

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

Figure 8-2. Searchmetrics correlation study

It is important to note that a correlation does not prove causation—in other words,
this information does not prove that these social media factors are a direct ranking
signal.
Nonetheless, the correlation is noteworthy and only supports our long-standing belief
that great content has a strong chance of earning a high number of traditional web
links, and of being shared more in social media.

What Is the Value of Social Signals?
Google was first established in 1996 based on the concept of PageRank, where links
from third-party websites would serve as votes for the quality of the site receiving the
links. This was a valuable concept because the Web evolved as an environment where
creating great content was rewarded through links and the cross-referencing of other
great content—a natural result.
The collection of data on all the links of the Web, which is referred to as the link graph,
is an enormous computational task that maps who links to whom in a vast diagram of
the Web’s interconnectivity. Figure 8-3 shows a conceptual representation of the link
graph. From this, search engines can extract valuable signals to identify relevant web
pages in response to a particular search query.

WHAT IS THE VALUE OF SOCIAL SIGNALS?

www.it-ebooks.info

541

Figure 8-3. The link graph is a map of all of the World Wide Web’s hyperlinks

This system in its original form, however, was dependent on the links originating from
editorial citations. In other words, it assumed that publishers created a link on a thirdparty website because they genuinely cared to send visitors from their own site to the
linked site solely because it was a great resource. This was a publisher’s primary incentive for providing the link. In fact, links were the first social signal used by search
engines to aid in ranking web pages.
Over time, of course, some publishers who realized there was a lot of money to be
made from high search rankings began cheating the system by purchasing or soliciting
links that were not citations at all. The proliferation of this link-selling economy and
schemes for getting links that are not earned based on the content’s merit, generally
referred to as link spam, has threatened search quality and resulted in a war between
search engines and link spammers.
Similar to the way in which the link graph acts as a proxy for real-world connections,
social connections and user behavior patterns reflect real-world relationships and values. In order to implement a link to a website, one must first have a web property.
While creating a website can in fact be free on today’s Web, one must commit time

542

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

and energy to that site to be viewed as a valuable resource. As a result, many people
do not make that investment.
Participating in social media platforms such as Facebook, Google+, or Twitter requires
zero cash outlay (beyond an Internet connection and a connecting device) and only a
small amount of time investment. As a result, social media is more populist in nature
than the link graph. Of course, the use of social media is not universal either, but it is
far more broadly adopted than the publication of websites.
As users, we like proof from our peers that something is good. If your friend liked it,
and you trust her judgment, you become more inclined to check it out yourself. For
example, your trusted friend is unlikely to have endorsed a spam site.
However, problems arise when you try to use these social signals as a ranking factor in
the search results. The search engines experimented with these signals and pulled back
because they found problems with it. There are some ways in which social information
is currently integrated into the search results, however, and these will be explored in
the next few sections.

Bing’s Experiments with Social Signals
Bing has relationships with many social media platforms. These relationships provide
Bing with real-time access to any updates that occur on those networks. For example,
when someone posts an update on his Facebook page, Bing gets notified of that
update via its API, which means it gets the data relatively quickly, and with minimal
overhead. Social sites that Bing has such relationships with include:
• Facebook
• Twitter
• Foursquare
• Quora
• Klout
In contrast, Google has to crawl Facebook to obtain comparable social update info, and
only as of May 19th, 2015 did Google start to get access to Twitter data via API. This is
what makes the experiments that Bing has conducted interesting to review in detail.
For example, Bing experimented with using data from Facebook as a ranking factor in
the search results. Figure 8-4 shows how Bing’s search results looked in 2010 if you
performed a search on the phrase New York Post.

BING’S EXPERIMENTS WITH SOCIAL SIGNALS

www.it-ebooks.info

543

Figure 8-4. Bing search results from 2010 for “New York Post”

Notice how two articles with a number of Facebook likes are highlighted in the results.
However, if you performed the same search in 2011, the nature of the result had
changed quite a bit, as you can see in Figure 8-5.

Figure 8-5. Bing search results from 2011 for “New York Post”

The result is quite different: Bing has dispensed with showing the most liked articles
and instead highlights a recent post from the newspaper. While it is not indicated in
the search result, it is possible that this article has received recent Facebook likes, but
we don’t know that for sure. Figure 8-6 shows us, however, that this ambiguity has
been eliminated in Bing’s results for the same search in 2012.

544

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

Figure 8-6. Bing search results from 2012 for “New York Post”

In a February 2013 interview by Eric Enge with Bing’s Stefan Weitz,2 Weitz had this to
say about whether Bing used likes as a ranking signal:
Not now, no. The notion of a Like is still a little bit perplexing from a ranking
perspective. What does a Like mean for a page? Does the user like the design,
the content, or maybe just the picture? We tend to not just use a pure Like
signal to do ranking.
He also said:
Shares are basically the same as likes—not used a ton for web ranking except
in velocity (like Twitter).
For a while, Bing went in a completely different direction by separating out the social
part of its search results into a sidebar. Figure 8-7 illustrates this implementation.

2 Eric Enge, “Graph Search & Social Search With Bing’s Stefan Weitz,” Stone Temple Consulting,

February 18, 2013, https://www.stonetemple.com/graph-search-social-search-with-bings-stefan-weitz/.

BING’S EXPERIMENTS WITH SOCIAL SIGNALS

www.it-ebooks.info

545

Figure 8-7. Bing’s social sidebar

Does Google Use Facebook as a Ranking Signal?
As previously mentioned, unlike Bing, Google must crawl Facebook to get data on
activity on the site. Consequently, Google will not be able to get any data from pages
that are not marked as Public by the profile owner. That is a very large crawling burden. To determine how many pages Google indexes from Facebook, Stone Temple
Consulting performed a study, published in December 2013. We can see how many
pages Google has indexed from Facebook in Figure 8-8.

Figure 8-8. Facebook pages indexed by Google

Google has indexed 5.14 billion pages from Facebook according to this query. To put
this in perspective, data released by Facebook in February 2014 indicated that it had
1.2 billion users, and that 10% of these put out daily updates, and 4% put out more
than one update per day.

546

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

We can use these figures to estimate the number of total Facebook updates per month.
We can start by taking 10% of the total number of users, and multiplying that by 30 to
account for all the users who do at least one update per day. This works out to 3.6 billion updates per month.
However, we also know that 4% of users perform multiple updates, and we can estimate their usage by guessing that they average three updates per day. Of course, some
users perform only two, others do much more than three.
For purposes of this analysis we are going to estimate the total number of additional
updates per day as the number of users times 2 times 30. Note that we use 2 in this
calculation instead of 3, as we have already counted 1 daily update per user in our
prior calculation. The result is another 2.88 billion updates per day.
This gives us an average of 6.48 billion Facebook updates per day, which is already
more than Google has indexed from Facebook in total! The study also tracked the
monthly pages Google indexed from Facebook from January 2012 through March
2014, as shown in Table 8-1.
Table 8-1. Facebook indexed pages by month
Month

Indexed pages

% of estimated updates per month

March 2014 (through 3/29)

77,900,000

1.91%

February 2014

4,330,000

0.11%

January 2014

5,490,000

0.13%

December 2013

7,840,000

0.19%

November 2013

7,160,000

0.18%

October 2013

8,510,000

0.21%

September 2013

4,160,000

0.10%

August 2013

26,200,000

0.64%

July 2013

48,400,000

1.18%

June 2013

168,000,000

4.11%

May 2013

166,000,000

4.06%

April 2013

166,000,000

4.06%

March 2013

3,160,000

0.08%

February 2013

2,770,000

0.07%

January 2013

1,950,000

0.05%

December 2012

2,740,000

0.07%

November 2012

2,690,000

0.07%

October 2012

2,630,000

0.06%

September 2012

1,550,000

0.04%

August 2012

2,570,000

0.06%

DOES GOOGLE USE FACEBOOK AS A RANKING SIGNAL?

www.it-ebooks.info

547

Month

Indexed pages

% of estimated updates per month

July 2012

2,490,000

0.06%

June 2012

2,440,000

0.06%

May 2012

1,030,000

0.03%

April 2012

2,510,000

0.06%

March 2012

2,150,000

0.05%

February 2012

1,860,000

0.05%

January 2012

856,000

0.02%

As you can see, the indexing of this content appears to happen at a very low rate. Note
there are some sources of error in this data, as the total number of Facebook updates
has been increasing over time, and the site: operator is not a precise measure in Google. But these errors do not impact the basic conclusion: Google does not index the
overwhelming majority of Facebook posted content.
Also of significance is that links from Facebook to external pages use the nofollow
attribute (which is defined in Chapter 6 and highlighted in Figure 8-9). This means
that these links do not pass PageRank to the pages receiving the link.

Figure 8-9. Facebook links are nofollowed

One last consideration is whether Google might place more emphasis on indexing
posts from highly influential people. Perhaps it places more weight on shares by people and brands with authoritative profiles. To test this theory, Stone Temple Consulting
performed a study.
This study looked at 40 Facebook posts done by 85 influential users over a one-year
period. The users examined each had at least 125,000 likes for their page. The tested
posts were spread over differing time intervals as follows:

548

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

• 10 most recent posts
• 10 posts at least 3 months old
• 10 posts at least 6 months old
• 10 posts at least 12 months old
Each post was tested to see if Google had it in its index. Figure 8-10 shows the results.
In aggregate, about 59% of these posts were indexed.

Figure 8-10. Facebook pages indexed by Google

Note that about 74% of the text posts were indexed and 75% of the posts with links in
them were indexed. If these were a major ranking factor, it seems likely that Google
would be indexing a larger percentage of these posts.
This result, combined with Bing’s stance on using Facebook data in search, suggests
that Facebook posts are not a major factor in driving the search results. This could possibly change in the future, however, as search engines continuously experiment with
new ways to use different types of signals as a ranking factor.

DOES GOOGLE USE FACEBOOK AS A RANKING SIGNAL?

www.it-ebooks.info

549

Does Google Use Twitter as a Ranking Signal?
An analysis of Twitter usage shows some similar results to those we saw with Facebook. In Twitter’s IPO filing, the company reported that it is handling more than 500
million tweets per day on average. Figure 8-11 shows a combination of two Google
search queries that attempt to find out how many Twitter status updates Google has in
its index.

Figure 8-11. Twitter pages indexed by Google

This shows a total of 1.27 billion pages, which is a pretty small number when you consider that there are 500 million tweets per day.
In another Stone Temple Consulting study by coauthor Eric Enge, the search query in
Figure 8-11 was repeated, but it included the daterange: operator to see how many new
pages Google kept in its index on a monthly basis from January 2012 through June
2014. That data is shown in Table 8-2.
Table 8-2. Twitter indexation by month

550

Month

Indexed pages

% of 500M

Jan-12

494,000

0.10%

Feb-12

1,230,000

0.25%

Mar-12

1,330,000

0.27%

Apr-12

1,220,000

0.24%

May-12

669,000

0.13%

Jun-12

1,720,000

0.34%

Jul-12

2,360,000

0.47%

Aug-12

2,660,000

0.52%

Sep-12

1,850,000

0.37%

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

Month

Indexed pages

% of 500M

Oct-12

2,520,000

0.50%

Nov-12

1,870,000

0.37%

Dec-12

1,530,000

0.31%

Jan-13

924,000

0.18%

Feb-13

1,590,000

0.32%

Mar-13

1,640,000

0.33%

Apr-13

1,570,000

0.31%

May-13

924,000

0.18%

Jun-13

1,540,000

0.31%

Jul-13

1,420,000

0.28%

Aug-13

1,320,000

0.26%

Sep-13

777,000

0.16%

Oct-13

1,480,000

0.30%

Nov-13

1,530,000

0.31%

Dec-13

1,620,000

0.32%

Jan-14

1,030,000

0.21%

Feb-14

1,920,000

0.38%

Mar-14

2,270,000

0.45%

Apr-14

3,270,000

0.65%

May-14

2,750,000

0.55%

Jun-14

9,090,000

1.82%

This data suggests that the indexing rate of tweets is actually quite low. However, as
we mentioned with Facebook, the number of results from site: queries is not always
that precise. The study also included an analysis of the indexation of posts for 963 different Twitter accounts. Of these, 58 had at least 100,000 followers. These were handselected to be highly influential people. The study then tracked the indexing of their
tweets over time. The results are shown in Figure 8-12.

DOES GOOGLE USE TWITTER AS A RANKING SIGNAL?

www.it-ebooks.info

551

Figure 8-12. Indexation of tweets over time

Taken together, Table 8-2 and Figure 8-12 show us that Google’s overall indexing of
tweet content is low, but it does index a high percentage of tweets from more influential accounts. Note that it is possible that this is because these tweets tend to receive
links. This would increase Google’s desire to index the content in the tweet.
Figure 8-13 shows the source code for a tweet containing a shared link. As with Facebook, this link is nofollowed, so no PageRank is passed.

Figure 8-13. Twitter links use the nofollow attribute

As of May 19th, 2015, Google started accessing Twitter data via the API, but a study
published by Eric Enge in July of 2015 showed that increases in indexation of tweets
had occurred, but the total indexed tweets remains small. In summary, the evidence
suggests that Google does not currently use activity in Twitter as a ranking signal.

552

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

Does Google Use Google+ as a Ranking Signal?
Google+ is the social network owned by Google itself. Unlike Facebook and Twitter,
Google obtains information from Google+ in real time. As soon as you complete a
share in Google+, Google knows it has happened. This makes it seem far more likely
that Google would use this data as a ranking factor in its search results. In fact, there
are a few clear ways that Google+ impacts the Google search results.

Google+ Personalization
Personalization plays a significant role in Google’s search results, and Google+ can be a
part of that. For example, if someone is following you on Google+, the chances that
she will see your posts in Google’s search results go way up. Figure 8-14 shows an
example of this.

Figure 8-14. Google+ personalization in action

DOES GOOGLE USE GOOGLE+ AS A RANKING SIGNAL?

www.it-ebooks.info

553

The highlighted listing ranks #1 in the organic search results when the searcher is logged in, but ranks only in position #12 when the same user performs an incognito search
(in Google’s Chrome browser, this mode turns all personalization off). This is a big
impact! The reason for the change in the personalized results is that four people whom
this user follows on Google+ have +1’ed the content.
The impact of this on your business can be quite substantial. Consider the post shown
in Figure 8-15.
The great majority of these +1s are likely to be from people interested in search, and
for all of these users, this article will rank higher in the search results. But it is also
more likely to rank higher for everyone they follow! This means that there are two
bites at this apple already:
• People who follow the author on Google+ are more likely to see it
• People who follow anyone who +1’s the content are more likely to see it
This is already a very big deal. If you can build a strong audience of your own, or if
major influencers in your market space +1 or share your content, you can get a lot of
exposure to your target market.
In addition, it appears that people you exchange Gmails with can also create the type
of connection that leads to the personalization of results.3

3 Rand Fishkin, “Using Google+ to Appear in the Top Results Every Time - Whiteboard Friday,” Moz

Blogs, November 1, 2013, http://bit.ly/using_google_plus.

554

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

Figure 8-15. A post with many +1s

Google+ Posts in the Search Results
Google+ posts themselves can also rank in the search results, as you can see in
Figure 8-16.

DOES GOOGLE USE GOOGLE+ AS A RANKING SIGNAL?

www.it-ebooks.info

555

Figure 8-16. Google+ post in search results

This post came up even though the search was performed in incognito mode, so all
personalization of the results is turned off.

Google+ Brand Pages in the Search Results
Another benefit of Google+ is that your company (or institution) can create a brand
page. If you properly connect that brand page with your website using the rel="pub
lisher" tag (which is covered in more detail in Chapter 6), and you have some basic
level of activity on the page, it can show up in the search results as well.
This is particularly likely to happen on a search for your own brand name, as shown in
the search for Major League Soccer in Figure 8-17.

556

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

Figure 8-17. Brand page showing in Google’s search results

This is nice real estate to own, and can really add to the brand impression of your business. For Major League Soccer, we see the number of followers it has on Google+, and
a Follow button at the top right. Google obtains additional information from many different sources, but it is experimenting with allowing publishers to get their social profiles added to the panel shown on the right.

Google+ Impact on Nonpersonalized Rankings of Content
Many people have debated whether Google+ impacts the nonpersonalized results in
Google as well. As Figure 8-18 indicates, Google+ posts used to pass PageRank, but this
is no longer the case.

Figure 8-18. Links in Google+ posts used to pass PageRank

You can examine the source code of a Google+ post in detail to verify that these links
are now nofollowed. Figure 8-19 shows an example of the source code for a particular
post.

DOES GOOGLE USE GOOGLE+ AS A RANKING SIGNAL?

www.it-ebooks.info

557

Figure 8-19. Google+ links are nofollowed

Study on Google+ as a Ranking Factor
Despite the evidence to the contrary just shown, many people still believe that activity
in Google+ can drive search rankings. For that reason, Stone Temple Consulting’s Eric
Enge performed a study on this as well. The study was designed to see if Google+
shares of links to a web page (not on Google+) would improve the rankings of those
pages.
This study took a number of web pages and published them on three different websites. These pages all had these characteristics:
• The pages contained fresh, original content, relevant to the site on which they
were published.
• The pages had no links to them whatsoever. No external pages linked to them,
and no links were implemented from the pages from the domain on which they
were published.
• There was absolutely no Google code (i.e., no Google Analytics code, Google+
code, or any other kind of Google code) implemented on the pages.

558

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

• Participants in the test were not allowed to use Google Chrome to visit the pages.
The next step was to conduct some Google+ shares to those web pages so that Google
would discover the pages. These shares were done on July 19, 2013, and by July 29,
2013, all of the pages in the test had been indexed. At that point, rankings for very
long-tail search terms were monitored until the end of the test.
Seven days after initial indexation, an additional set of shares was performed to the
pages. The purpose of this latter set of shares was to see if the rankings that were being
monitored would change. You can see a partial data set for the rankings in
Figure 8-20.

Figure 8-20. Google+ ranking study test results

In short, there was no real evidence of any movement in rankings as a result of the
test. Based on this result, there is no reason to believe that rankings are impacted by
Google+ shares.
Last but not least is Google’s recent Hummingbird release. While most people associate
this update solely with improvements in processing natural language queries, this is
only one aspect of Hummingbird, and in fact it is a complete rewrite of Google’s search
engine platform. According to Danny Sullivan, part of the goal with Hummingbird was
to allow Google to better process signals other than links, such as signals from social
platforms.4
While this new information implies that Google is not using social signals yet, it suggests that Google is considering using them in the future.

4 For the full discussion, see “The Future of Search With Danny Sullivan”.

DOES GOOGLE USE GOOGLE+ AS A RANKING SIGNAL?

www.it-ebooks.info

559

How Might Google Use Google+ as a Ranking Factor?
Google will work hard to develop algorithms that extract clear signals of value from
Google+. How might it do that? We’ll illustrate with an example. Consider the following three people, bearing in mind that this example is pure speculation:

Person 1
This person is active on Google+ and he shares lots of content—his own, and content shared by others. In addition, he always adds thoughtful commentary in his
shares and comments on a lot of other people’s posts as well. The content he posts
gets lots of +1s, reshares, and comments, and his comments on other people’s
posts often draw a reaction too. Many of the people he interacts with frequently
also get tons of interaction with their activity in Google+.

Person 2
Like Person 1, this person is active on Google+ and shares lots of content—her
own, and content shared by others. However, she doesn’t often add much content
and she doesn’t get the same level of interaction from others as Person 1. The
interaction she gets tends to be more perfunctory in nature.

Person 3
This person is not on Google+ at all. He is a total rockstar in his space, and everybody knows it, but he does not have a Google+ profile.
Google can’t afford to punish Person 3 in the search results. That would be bad for its
primary product (you know, the one it makes all the money on?). What Google can
do, though, is make comparative judgments between Person 1 and Person 2. In fact,
Google may look for ways to recognize the relative authority of Person 3 using signals
outside of Google+ and reward him accordingly.
Of course, we don’t know exactly how Google is looking at these types of signals, but
it will try to find ways to extract value from them that increase the quality of its
results. That demands a balanced approach to the data on Google’s part, and an
incredible amount of testing and verification.
We know that the personalization impact is quite strong, and that Google+ posts themselves can rank in the SERPs. This is already a compelling reason to engage in
Google+, especially if there is a real audience for you there. We also know that Google
gets the information from Google+ directly. Unlike with Facebook and Twitter, there is
no crawling involved in this process. While Google+ continues to grow, on July 27,
2015, Google announced that they would “decouple” Google+ from other Google
products—essentially removing the requirement that Google+ be the unified identity
for users across all Google products. Later that month, Google began the “unverification” of inactive Google+ local (GMB) pages. How Google+ will evolve has yet to be
determined, but these moves have definitely signaled a shift in Goolge’s strategy.

560

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

The Indirect Influence of Social Media Marketing
Social media can also influence search rankings in a number of indirect ways. For
example, it can have a direct branding impact. Here are some other areas where social
media can have an indirect influence:

Audience building
You can build a following by using social media platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest, and others to regularly communicate valuable information. Successful use of this tactic can help you develop greater engagement with your customers. This greater engagement can lead customers to become brand ambassadors as
a result of feeling a closer connection to your organization.

Customer service
Social media sites can provide an effective incremental channel for customer service departments, enabling them to become aware of customer issues that they
might not otherwise hear about. While this may not seem like an SEO concern, it
can enhance the brand building efforts of your company. People who are able to
see a proactive and effective customer service effort by a company learn to value
their relationship with that company even more. In fact, many of today’s consumers expect a rapid response time to any complaint they make via social media.
Failure to meet this expectation can actually be harmful to your brand.

Viral impact
Once an audience feels closely engaged with a company, their willingness to
spread the word is greatly enhanced. Customers who feel a strong affiliation with
a brand are more likely to help spread the word on new offerings or promotional
programs to others in their network.

Link building
Publishers with a strong following on a social media platform can release new
content on their websites and then announce it through their social media
accounts. This can lead to links to the new content and is an effective way to build
deep links to the site.

Citations
As discussed earlier in this chapter, links in Facebook and Twitter are counted by
search engines, but it is also likely (though not confirmed) that brand mentions
are also valuable. As search engines look for ways to measure how much they
trust a brand, one metric they might use is how many times that brand is referenced across the Web.

Brand search generation
People who learn about a brand and first become engaged with it through a social
media presence may later choose to generate a search query on that brand. As

THE INDIRECT INFLUENCE OF SOCIAL MEDIA MARKETING

www.it-ebooks.info

561

with citations, a large volume of actual brand searches is a strong signal of
prominence.
There are a large number of social media platforms, and you can waste a lot of time if
you chase them all. Here is a brief commentary on the major players that can help you
with the promotion of your website:

Facebook
Facebook is the largest of the social networks, with worldwide usage over 1.2 billion users.5 This represents more than 10% of the total world population. Facebook has the largest audience and is certainly worth including as a key part of
your social media strategy. In the US, more than 7 out of 10 Internet users are
using Facebook. In addition, Facebook’s advertising platform provides highly granular targeting, as is discussed more in the section “Paid social media” on page 493
in Chapter 7.

Twitter
As of June 2014, Twitter reported 255 million active users.6 The user base may be
smaller than that of Facebook, but it certainly includes a large number of influencers who can help create visibility for your organization. Twitter remains
skewed toward male users, with nearly 50% more men on the platform than
women.

LinkedIn
As of April 2014, LinkedIn had more than 300 million members worldwide,7 making it a powerful social network. You can use it to build a strong network of connections, and paid versions of the service allow you to use its InMail functionality
to send unsolicited emails (in very limited volume) to members, which, if done
judiciously, can help you initiate new relationships with influencers of interest.

Google+
While Google+ reports that it has 540 million active users, external research
shows that about half of these do not actively use the social network.8 However,
270 million or more active users is still a significant number.

5 Ami Sedghi, “Facebook: 10 years of Social Networking, in Numbers,” The Guardian’s Technology

Datablog, February 4, 2014, http://bit.ly/fb_in_numbers.
6 See “Company | About”.
7 Kurt Wagner, “LinkedIn Hits 300 Million Users Amid Mobile Push,” Mashable, April 18, 2014,

http://mashable.com/2014/04/18/linkedin-300-million-users/.
8 Claire Cain Miller, “The Plus in Google Plus? It’s Mostly for Google,” New York Times, February

14, 2014, http://bit.ly/plus_for_google.

562

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

Instagram
Instagram reportedly has over 200 million users, and is growing fast. Piper Jaffray
reports that it is the most important social network among teens.9 Instagram is
designed from the ground up as a mobile experience.

Pinterest
Pinterest may be quite a bit smaller than the previous platforms, but it is a growing network with 70 million reported users.10 The network skews toward a female
demographic, so if that is your target market, it could be a great platform for you
to focus on. It’s considered a highly “immersive” media in terms of time spent in
the app and numbers of boards built per person. The audience on Pinterest is still
US-centric.

YouTube
YouTube can be thought of as a search engine, but it is also a social network. People love to share videos and do so in volume. YouTube also has a very large audience, with 159.1 million unique viewers per month as of December 2013.11

WhatsApp
WhatsApp is a cross-platform mobile-messaging app that positions itself as a costfree alternative to SMS communications. WhatsApp is the number-one mobile
messaging app based on a survey of 3,759 users across the United States, China,
Brazil, South Africa, and Indonesia.
There are many other social sites worthy of consideration. These include:
• Specialized sites (e.g., Vine and Snapchat)
• Q&A sites (e.g., Yahoo! Answers, StrackExchange, Quora, Formspring, and
ChaCha)
• Document sharing sites (e.g., SlideShare, DocStoc, and Scribd)
• Local business sites (e.g., Google Local Business Center, Yelp, UrbanSpoon, YellowPages, CitySearch, and TripAdvisor)
• Social news sites (e.g., reddit and Techmeme)
• Bookmarking sites (e.g., StumbleUpon, Delicious, and Trunk.ly)

9 Piper Jaffray 27th Semi-Annual Taking Stock with Teens Survey, Spring 2014, http://www.piperjaf

fray.com/private/pdf/TSWT%20Infographics.pdf.
10 Megan Ritter, “Market Your Brand to Pinterest’s Highest User Base,” Social Media Week, August

14, 2014, http://socialmediaweek.org/blog/2014/08/market-brand-pinterests-highest-user-base/.
11 Greg Jarboe, “Online Content Videos Break Record with 52 Billion Monthly Views,” Search

Engine Watch, January 13, 2014, http://bit.ly/content_videos.

THE INDIRECT INFLUENCE OF SOCIAL MEDIA MARKETING

www.it-ebooks.info

563

• Vertically focused social sites—as may apply to specific vertical markets (for example, there is a knitting social site at http://www.knittng.com, so there may be a social
site specific to your vertical market)

Monitoring, Measuring, and Improving Social Media
Marketing: Best Practices
While search engine optimization and social media marketing are two distinct practices, the influence of social media behavior on search results is, and will continue to be,
important to consider. This section will explore some basic aspects of how to optimize
your efforts in the social realm to help your SEO.
Social media networks all operate as communities. In reality, each network is a community of communities. No individual interacts with an entire network. Each user
finds his “tribe” of followers and following. Even within those groups, there will be
tighter “inner circles” of people and/or brands that get the most interaction and attention from a user.
The structure, rules, and methods of interaction may vary, but a social media network’s primary focus is to create and foster relationships. For example, you may think
of YouTube as a video site, but a better label for it would be a video-sharing site. Social
network sharing is done with the ultimate goal of attracting and engaging a following.
People aren’t on social networks to broadcast into a void; they want to feel that they
are being heard and that their content has meaning for others.
Effective use of social media results from fostering relationships that build your brand’s
reach, authority, and trust. Try to avoid seeing it as a broadcast, advertising, or even
direct-selling medium. Even with brands, social media users want authentic engagement. They will resist being sold to. But handled properly, social media provides an
excellent opportunity to build positive associations, so that when prospects are ready
to buy, your brand is top-of-mind.
The key to success in any community is to be a contributor. You must put something
into it to get anything back out of it. This requires authentic participation, as little
value accrues to those who participate in an artificial way.
Find ways to contribute content, information, and opinions to discussions. Using Twitter as an example, one approach is to start your day by reviewing the daily news
related to your market space, pick out the content you consider the most valuable, and
share those items with your following. Another approach is to offer valuable tips on a
regular basis. A third approach is to be known for controversial opinions, but be aware
of the impact this may have on your brand. Bring a unique viewpoint.

564

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

However, if you only share content, whether your own or curated from other sources,
you will always be limited in how far your influence will extend. Remember that people are on social media, at least in part, to be affirmed—to feel that they matter to others. For that reason, you should dedicate some time each day to engaging with the
posts of others. Offer constructive, helpful comments and replies. Don’t just say “great
post!” but explain specifically what you liked about it, or contribute information or
insight on the topic. Not only does this endear you to the person whose content is the
recipient of your comments, but others seeing the conversation may follow you
because of your helpfulness and knowledge.
Overall, focus on building your credibility and authority. These are key elements to
success in a social environment. Once people accept you as a legitimate participant,
the doors will start to open for you.
Even if you are a novice (a.k.a. “noob”) in your market area, you still have something
to offer. The experts can learn by watching how you learn as you gain experience.
Sometimes just posting a really good question can be as valuable as providing a great
answer. Such engagement brings a surprising amount of value to the community, and
if you can also bring some personality into the process, people will try hard to help
you and will want to engage with you further.
As a publisher, there will also likely be times when you want to put something out
there that is self-promotional. This is fine as long as you don’t do it with all your communications, and make certain that you do it in an engaging way. You earn the right
to occasionally self-promote by being considered a valued contributor to the
community.

Claiming Key Profiles
Make sure to claim your brand/profile at key social sites. Services like Trackur and
Radian6 allow you to monitor the use of your brand across a wide array of social sites.
You will want to set up a brand presence on each social media platform even if you
don’t intend to use a network yet, in part to prevent your name from being taken by
impostors or “squatters” (those who claim brand name profiles in hopes of later selling
them to the actual brands). Here are some of the sites where you should create a
brand profile for your organization:
• Facebook
• Twitter
• Google+
• LinkedIn
• YouTube

MONITORING, MEASURING, AND IMPROVING SOCIAL MEDIA MARKETING: BEST PRACTICES

www.it-ebooks.info

565

• Pinterest
• CrunchBase
• Quora
• About.me
• Instagram
• Tumblr
• SlideShare
• reddit
• StumbleUpon
• Delicious
• StackExchange
• Google Places for Business
• Yelp
• UrbanSpoon
• YellowPages
• CitySearch
• TripAdvisor
Use NameChk.com to rapidly see if your name is available across a wide range of social
sites. Note that this does not mean that you should plan on building an active presence
on all of these sites; for most companies, that’s unrealistic. However, claiming the profiles will prevent other people from implementing profiles with your brand name on
any of these platforms.

Deciding on a New Social Network
When you first consider engaging in a new social network, it is hard to be sure what
return on investment (ROI) you will get for your efforts, and what you will need to
commit to get that ROI. It’s a good idea to start your efforts with an experimentation
cycle designed to help you determine what you will be able to get out of it.
A word about ROI in social media: remember that social media is primarily for reach,
branding, and trust/authority building. Therefore, the best measurement for return on
social media efforts probably isn’t sales—at least, not directly. Measure your effectiveness in social media by metrics like followers, engaged followers (which is actually
more important than raw follower numbers), engagement per post, increased positive
brand mentions, and increased traffic to your site.

566

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

Here are some suggestions on how to set up experiments with various social networks:

Hypothesize about a site’s potential value.
Are the audience demographics a fit for what you want to accomplish? Is the
medium one that you effectively utilize? For example, you would not want to
consider YouTube if creating/sharing videos does not make sense for your organization. Take the time to consider these and other questions that affect the site’s
potential value to you before getting started.

Research what networks are being used by your competition.
Lack of competitors on a particular network is not necessarily a red flag. There
may be an opportunity for you to lead the way in your niche on that network, if
you can develop strategies to either find or develop an audience there.

Set up social media and analytic tracking systems to measure.
When you first start out, your returns will be much lower than they will be in the
long term as your credibility in communities builds, but even early results can
help guide you on what is most effective. We will discuss this more in the section
“Tracking Social Media” on page 568.

Create an account and invest a few hours in participating.
If the network has search, try different keywords to find people, groups, and communities discussing topics relevant to you, and start engaging in those posts and
creating your own. This will help you test your hypothesis about the value. A few
hours will not be enough time to start seeing any ROI, but it should help you better qualify whether the community has the potential to work for your
organization.
You won’t really know the effectiveness of a network until you start getting an
engaged following there. The best way to gain real followers is to seek out people
and communities within the network who are relevant to your vertical, follow
them, and begin engaging with them. People are more likely to follow you back
and/or recommend you to others when you do this.

If this initial test goes well and you still believe that the social network may be a good
investment, go a little further with it until you see some results.
At that point, step back and consider the return on the effort so far. Be aware that
your ROI should continue to increase as your credibility and authority build, but
this will give you an initial idea of what may be possible.

Reach out to some of the more authoritative people using the network to get a sense for the
types of returns they are seeing.
While this information will probably be qualitative rather than quantitative in
nature, it can help you learn what types of ROI might be possible.

MONITORING, MEASURING, AND IMPROVING SOCIAL MEDIA MARKETING: BEST PRACTICES

www.it-ebooks.info

567

Compare the potential ROI, including the potential long-term value of the connections you
can develop on the network, with other ways you could invest that same time and energy.
Keep at it if it looks like a high-value channel, and drop it if it doesn’t and try
something else!

Tracking Social Media
In the world of social media, there are several key metrics we’re interested in tracking:

Traffic data
How many visits and visitors did social media drive to our sites?

Fan/follower data
How many people are in our various networks and how are they growing?

Social interaction data
How are people interacting with, sharing, and resharing our content on social
networks?

Social content performance
How is the content we’re producing on social sites performing?
Getting the right metrics to answer these questions requires segmenting by network.
Not every question will have direct answers in the data, so you may need to make
assumptions or inferences. Buzzstream and Klipfolio are examples of popular tools for
tracking social media performance.

Facebook
Facebook offers a relative wealth of data through its built-in product for brand pages,
Facebook Insights. For example, you can see likes, post reach, and engagement (as
shown in Figure 8-21) or the demographics of your fans (as shown in Figure 8-22).

Figure 8-21. Facebook Insights dashboard

568

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

Figure 8-22. Facebook Insights demographics

Insights also has a very unique and powerful feature: integration on your website.
Using a small bit of JavaScript code, you can embed the Facebook Insights functionality on your site and receive information about all the users visiting your pages who are
logged into Facebook.
More information on Insights can be found at:
• Official Insights page on Facebook
• “How to Use Facebook Insights”

Twitter
Twitter and Facebook are likely to be the largest two social networks for referring traffic to most sites (although a Shareaholic study shows LinkedIn and Google+ drive
more engaged visitors; see http://bit.ly/google_plus_linkedin).
Twitter now provides limited analytics. For more detail, you should look into thirdparty social analytics tools.
The key metrics on Twitter are:

Followers (and follower growth over time)
The unique number of Twitter users who’ve “followed” your account, as shown in
Figure 8-23.

MONITORING, MEASURING, AND IMPROVING SOCIAL MEDIA MARKETING: BEST PRACTICES

www.it-ebooks.info

569

Figure 8-23. Twitter followers

Active followers
The number of followers who’ve logged into or used a feature of Twitter in the
past 30 days (those who have not are likely inactive or nonhuman accounts). This
data is challenging to get, and requires software that runs through your followers
and determines which are actively using via the API. Some of the third-party tools
discussed momentarily will show this information.

570

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

@ Replies
The number of tweets sent that begin with your account name. An example is
shown in Figure 8-24. These are seen only by the mentioned account and anyone
who follows both sender and receiver.

Figure 8-24. Tracking Twitter @Replies

@ Mentions
The number of tweets sent that include your account name (@ Replies are also @
Mentions). Figure 8-25 shows a tweet that includes Rand Fishkin’s account name,
but uses it inside the tweet rather than at the beginning. This means others on
Twitter can see the tweet by default, rather than only those who follow both
accounts.

Figure 8-25. Tracking Twitter @Mentions

Brand mentions
Tweets that contain the brand/account name but don’t use the @ symbol. An
example is shown in Figure 8-26.

Figure 8-26. Brand mentions in Twitter

MONITORING, MEASURING, AND IMPROVING SOCIAL MEDIA MARKETING: BEST PRACTICES

www.it-ebooks.info

571

Domain/URL mentions
The number of tweets that include a link that contains your brand name/domain
name. An example of this using Moz is shown in Figure 8-27. These now include,
by default, any shortened URL that contains the brand/domain name, as Twitter
automatically parses the final destination URL for matches to the query.

Figure 8-27. Tracking Twitter domain/URL mentions

Direct retweets
The number of retweets (using Twitter’s native retweet button/functionality) of
tweets you’ve posted that have appeared on the service, as shown in Figure 8-28.

Figure 8-28. Tracking Twitter retweets

RTs and vias
The number of tweets that contain an RT or via of your account (see the example
in Figure 8-29). These are similar to direct retweets, but aren’t necessarily counted
by Twitter’s automatic RT system because they modify the original message and
appear to come from a unique source. Some users indicate a modified retweet
with MT.

572

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

Figure 8-29. Modified RTs (MTs) in Twitter

Best performing content
The content you’ve shared on Twitter that has earned the most clicks, retweets,
and shares. This is now available in Twitter’s own analytics, but some third-party
tools give deeper analysis.

Direct traffic + non-Twitter.com drivers
Sources that have sent traffic to your site via Twitter’s ecosystem, even if they
come from desktop clients or other third-party software sources. See Figure 8-30
for an example. As of 2011, these show up (mostly) as coming from T.co (Twitter’s
link shortener), although some third-party link-shortening services, such as bit.ly,

MONITORING, MEASURING, AND IMPROVING SOCIAL MEDIA MARKETING: BEST PRACTICES

www.it-ebooks.info

573

have their own analytics for clicks on links you create through them, even if Twitter publicly changes them to t.co links.12

Figure 8-30. Tracking Twitter traffic

It’s often said that in analytics, nothing is worth tracking unless it can be used to take
action and improve. For the preceding metrics, the primary actions you’re tracking are
ones that relate to you. The key to taking better actions is comparing successful interactions, tweets, and content against less successful ones to determine what has the best
impact on growing your audience, bringing visits to your site, and eventually, driving
conversion actions.

LinkedIn
LinkedIn functions like a hybrid of Twitter and Facebook. Connections require acceptance from both sides, but public entities (like company pages) and groups can be
followed.
LinkedIn used to be known primarily as a sort of online address book of your business
connections, and a place for job hunters to post their résumés. Recently, though, it has
made major strides to reinvent itself as a true social network. Users now get a
Facebook-like news feed of content and conversations shared by people and companies they are linked to.
In early 2014, LinkedIn opened up its Publishing platform, formerly reserved to handpicked “influencers,” to all users. Publishing allows users to create bloglike content
that gets pushed out to their connections and followers. Other users can now follow
the Publisher content of anyone else without having to first gain a reciprocated connection with the author. These changes have made LinkedIn a much more significant
player in the social media influence-building arena, especially for B2B concerns.

12 Tom Critchlow, “Twitter’s t.co Link Shortening Service Is Game Changing - Here’s Why,” Distilled,

August 18, 2011, http://bit.ly/t_co_shortening.

574

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

You can also leverage LinkedIn groups to develop your visibility and build new connections. You can use LinkedIn search to find relevant groups that show active participation. Review the group rules to make sure that some are at least in place, and being
enforced. It’s best to find those that appear to have active discussions taking place.
You can also reach your target audience on LinkedIn using direct sponsored content,
which can be a powerful supplement to your content marketing efforts.
Like Facebook, LinkedIn has some built-in analytics for businesses as well as individual profiles, and lots of data points that are useful to track, including:

Company page reach and engagement
You can track the number of times your company’s LinkedIn profile and its shared
content have been viewed over time and the quantity and types of engagements
earned. An example of this is shown in Figure 8-31.

Figure 8-31. LinkedIn reach and engagement

Followers
As with Twitter, individuals can “follow” a brand account on LinkedIn and receive
status updates in their “updates” stream. Figure 8-32 shows stats for followers of a
LinkedIn account. The more followers you have, the greater your ability to reach
more people on LinkedIn with the content you share there.

MONITORING, MEASURING, AND IMPROVING SOCIAL MEDIA MARKETING: BEST PRACTICES

www.it-ebooks.info

575

Figure 8-32. Followers in LinkedIn

Connections
The number of unique connections for an individual profile on LinkedIn is a
worthwhile metric to track, but unfortunately, all that is available as of July 2014
is the raw, current count (as shown in Figure 8-33) and who those connections
are.

Figure 8-33. LinkedIn connections

Messages, invitations, and notifications
Figure 8-34 shows the status bar at the top of a LinkedIn page. The number on the
envelope shows unread messages and unreviewed connection invitations, while

576

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

the number on the flag represents unviewed news stream updates and other
updates, such as people viewing your profile or commenting on one of your
updates.

Figure 8-34. LinkedIn messages, invitations, and updates

Profile views
You can see how many people have looked at your profile over time, along with
some data about who they are (only paid “Pro” LinkedIn accounts can see the
identities of all profile viewers). Figure 8-35 shows an example.

Figure 8-35. Profile views on LinkedIn

Top keywords and referral sources
This list shows you the top keywords that LinkedIn users searched for prior to discovering your profile, and where they came from to get to your profile, as shown
in Figure 8-36. (Again, only a limited amount of data is shown unless you have a
paid account.)

MONITORING, MEASURING, AND IMPROVING SOCIAL MEDIA MARKETING: BEST PRACTICES

www.it-ebooks.info

577

Figure 8-36. Keywords and referral sources on LinkedIn

Content shares
As of July 2014, there is no way to measure or record the number of regular status updates/shares you’ve sent out over LinkedIn, nor the number of “likes”
you’ve received on the service.

LinkedIn Publishing
LinkedIn Publishing allows users to create original content with images, links, and
formatting, which is then pushed out to their connections, followers, and possibly
beyond. Other users can follow someone’s Publishing content without having to
make a two-way connection. LinkedIn Publishers get some rudimentary metrics,
such as number of views, likes, and comments for each post, as well as information on followers.

Traffic
LinkedIn isn’t a huge traffic driver for most sites, but for certain B2B sites, it can
be relatively substantial and the quality is often higher than other social sources.
Figure 8-37 shows a screenshot from a Google Analytics account.

Figure 8-37. LinkedIn traffic

Few third-party tools exist to help with LinkedIn metrics, but over time, some of the
tools for Facebook and Twitter may expand to LinkedIn.

578

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

Google+
Google’s social network is still relatively young, but at least three factors make it worthy of marketers’ attention:
• The network’s rapid growth, especially in the global market (some estimates now
make it the second largest social network, surpassing Twitter and second only to
Facebook).13
• The integration of Google+ into some of Google’s products and services—former
Google Vice President for Social Vic Gundotra has called it “the next version of
Google” and “the social layer of Google.”14 Google has since backed away from
integrating Google+ into all of its services.
• The influence of Google+ on Google search, particularly in the area of personalized search.15
Google has promised analytics for pages and profiles, but as of this writing those still
aren’t available. However, several third-party tools have gone a long way in delivering
the needed metrics. Among these are CircleCount, SteadyDemand, and NOD3X. The
latter is a sophisticated tool for in-depth analysis of follower engagement, reach, and
influence.
Significant metrics on Google+ include:

Number of followers
On Google+ “followers” are people or pages who have you or your page in at least
one of their circles. You can see the number of followers on a profile or page, as
shown in Figure 8-38 (if the profile or page owner has made followers visible in
settings, that is).

13 Matt McGee, “Report: Google+ Now 2nd-Biggest Social Network Worldwide,” Marketing Land,

January 28, 2013, http://bit.ly/google_plus_network.
14 Nick Bilton, Countering the Google Plus Image Problem,” New York Times, March 6, 2012, http://

bit.ly/image_problem.
15 Mark Traphagen, “How Google Plus Profiles & Pages Gain Search Authority,” Search Engine Land,

November 21, 2013, http://bit.ly/google_plus_search; Eric Enge, “Google+ & SEO: How Google+
Impacts Search Results,” Search Engine Watch, November 17, 2013, http://bit.ly/plus_impact.

MONITORING, MEASURING, AND IMPROVING SOCIAL MEDIA MARKETING: BEST PRACTICES

www.it-ebooks.info

579

Figure 8-38. Google+ followers and views

Views
View counts are new as of April 2014, and are displayed on the cover image of
profiles and pages that have not opted out of their display in settings. The view
count is an approximate total of all profile views, post impressions, and image
impressions since October 2012. For more on what comprises views and what this
metric might mean, see “New Google Plus Views Count: Important Metric or Vanity of Vanities?”.

+Mentions
On Google+ one user links to another by typing a “+” and then the user’s name.
This creates a link to the mentioned user’s profile, and also sends that user a notification that she has been mentioned. As of April 2014, Google+ does not provide
a count of these mentions, but some third-party tools do. You can view all your
recent mentions by clicking on the Mentions tab. Figure 8-39 shows an example.

Figure 8-39. Name mentions on Google+

Brand mentions
As shown in Figure 8-40, you can find recent mentions of your brand through the
Google+ search, using the Everything filter tab and changing the view from “Best
of” to “Most recent.”

580

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

Figure 8-40. Brand mentions on Google+

Content shares, content +1s, link shares, link +1s
You can view recent shares of links to your own site on Google+ in Google Analytics under Acquisition > Social > Data Hub Activity, with Google+ as the selected
network. Clicking the More button to the right of any Google+ page share allows
you to filter for all shares of that link, and to view the Google+ Ripples for that
link (Ripples are a graphic representation of all the public shares of the link on
Google+). You can also view the number of posts, reshares, +1s, and comments
for any link to your site that was shared on Google+ by navigating in Google Analytics to Acquistion > Social > Landing Pages, and then clicking the desired link.
Next select “Google+” and then change the Primary Dimension to “Social Network
and Action.” See Figure 8-41 for an example.

Figure 8-41. Google+ site link activity in Google Analytics

MONITORING, MEASURING, AND IMPROVING SOCIAL MEDIA MARKETING: BEST PRACTICES

www.it-ebooks.info

581

Traffic
Google+ can become a major site traffic driver for brands that develop an active
following there. Figure 8-42 is a screenshot of traffic from Google+ as shown in
Google Analytics.

Figure 8-42. Traffic from social networks in Google Analytics

Perhaps due to privacy issues, Google+ uses a single referring URL for all traffic, helping to consolidate the data in analytics reports, but making it frustrating to determine
which shares/users/links sent the most, or most valuable, traffic.

Instagram, StumbleUpon, Quora, Yelp, Flickr, and YouTube
Depending on the quantity and value of the traffic that other social networks send,
there may indeed be additional metrics worth tracking. Sites worthy of consideration
are Instagram, Pinterest, StumbleUpon, SlideShare, reddit, and Quora. These are likely
worth some investment on the metrics and effort front, and if small quantities of contribution/participation yield large returns, more investment is likely warranted.

Social news sites
The two most well known social news sites are reddit and Techmeme.
As we covered in Chapter 7, reddit is a social link aggregation and discussion site, selforganized into topical, independently moderated communities (“subreddits”). There
are millions of visitors each day, and reddit has hosted “ask me anything” interviews
with many celebrities and a few politicians, including Barack Obama.
Articles posted on reddit can potentially receive a lot of search traffic, so it can be
tempting to try to influence this process to help achieve your goals. However, this is a
bad idea, because registered users on reddit (“redditors”) are very defensive of their
platform, and quick to squash any attempts at manipulation or any commercial
behavior.

582

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

Even trying to reach out to influencers on this platform will quickly draw a negative
reaction, and can result in your being labeled as a spammer. Any attempt at solicitation runs a significant risk of your being downvoted, attacked, and/or blacklisted.
Still, there is a lot to be gained from reddit, but before you embark on such a campaign, spend some time at http://www.reddit.com/wiki/reddiquette, to learn the expected
behavior on the platform. The best strategy for reddit is to try to participate normally
and submit a lot of other people’s great content to the correct subreddits, and occasionally submit your own potentially viral content, without giving the appearance of
self-promotion.
Techmeme is a site that provides a curated list of the hottest and most important tech
industry news, and it does so on a single page. The site has a small team of editors who
review what’s going on and decide what to post. The only way to suggest content to
this team is via Twitter.

Blogs and forums
The world of social media started out as one where discussion sites (forums, Q&A, bulletin boards, etc.) and the blogosphere reigned supreme. Eventually, the major social
networks captured the hearts and minds of most users, but the reports of the death of
blogs and forums have turned out to be greatly exaggerated.
Forums and blogs still hold rich opportunities for marketers. For example, Moz.com
receives tens of thousands of visits each week from blogs and discussion sites of all
sizes, and the site’s participation/interaction with those sources often yields fantastic
results in referral traffic, mindshare, and links. Many brands do likewise, hiring community managers or evangelists to engage in the sites where industry topics are discussed, building up strong, recognizable profiles that help bring awareness and produce traffic and links.
Thus, as responsible inbound marketers, it’s our job to measure these channels and
quantify their impact. Participation in blogs and forums can provide a lot of value,
including:

Site/brand mentions
Mentions of your site or brand name can help lead you to content and conversations worthy of engagement, and it’s often useful to track the quantities of those
mentions (and possibly the sentiment as well) over time. Google Alerts and Mention are both potentially worth looking at to help you monitor these mentions.

Links
Direct links are nice because they appear either in link-tracking tools like Search
Console, Open Site Explorer, Majestic SEO, Ahrefs, LinkResearchTools, or directly
in your web analytics (if they send any traffic).

MONITORING, MEASURING, AND IMPROVING SOCIAL MEDIA MARKETING: BEST PRACTICES

www.it-ebooks.info

583

Traffic
A must-have for any inbound channel, visit tracking is the simplest metric here.
For any inbound marketing channel (social or otherwise) you are considering, you
should use a process similar to that shown in Figure 8-43.

Figure 8-43. Process for identifying high ROI social networks

Losing a few hours to channels that don’t provide value is a small price to pay for the
value of discovering and participating on those that do. You can see a presentation on
a more in-depth process for evaluating social metrics in these two articles: “The Power
of Inbound Marketing” and “Social Media ROI: How To Define a Strategic Plan”.
NOTE
A special thanks to Mark Traphagen for his contributions to this portion of the
chapter.

User Engagement as a Measure of Search Quality
Measuring user behavior on a website can provide strong signals about that site’s quality. For example, if a visitor arrives at a site, visits 10 pages over the course of an hour,
selects a product, adds it to her shopping cart, and then buys it, chances are pretty
good that she found what she wanted there. Contrast that with the visitor who arrives
at a web page and hits the back button of his browser in less than a second.
These are examples of user engagement signals, and search engines are beginning to
use this kind of data in their algorithms. The specific signals they are using and how
they’re using them is not easily discerned, however. Search engines are secretive about
the details of their algorithms because they are important trade secrets, and because it
makes a spammer’s job harder. However, we know that user engagement signals are

584

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

useful in measuring search quality and may also be used as ranking signals. If a page is
a poor result for a user’s search queries, then the user’s (probably very limited) interactions with that page will show it.
This section will examine the ways that the search engines can collect user engagement data, and the types of metrics they can collect. It should also be mentioned that
in addition to the possible search result ranking impact of these signals, publishers
should actively track user engagement metrics on their websites for a number of other
reasons, including measuring the quality of the organic search traffic the site is receiving. Increased website engagement will result in increased conversion rates.

How Google and Bing Collect Engagement Metrics
Bing and Google both have a large number of data sources available to them. Some of
the most important are:

Search results
User interactions with the search results are a key source of data. For example, if
the user conducts a search and chooses not to click on the first or second result
but does click on the third, that can be a signal that the third result may be the
best result for that query, especially if this is a common occurrence. Search
engines accumulate data like this in high volumes every day.

Browsers
Microsoft’s Internet Explorer and Google’s Chrome both have sizable market share
and could be a rich data source for search engines (see “March 2014 Market
Share” and “IE11 passes IE10 in market share, Firefox slips a bit, and Chrome
gains back share”). Browsers are powerful data sources because they can monitor
every action a user takes.

Contextual advertising
Google AdSense and Microsoft Content Ads are excellent sources of data as well.
These offerings allow publishers to place ad units on their websites and earn revenue when users click on them, and data is passed back.

Toolbars
Surfers can install either the Google toolbar or the Bing toolbar in their browsers.
These toolbars offer users a number of conveniences that improve their web surfing experience.

Phone operating systems
Both Google and Bing offer phone operating systems. Determining phone OS
market share is complex for many reasons, but an April 2014 TechRepublic article
pegged Google’s Android OS as the #1 phone OS in the United States, with more

USER ENGAGEMENT AS A MEASURE OF SEARCH QUALITY

www.it-ebooks.info

585

than 75% market share,16 and the Windows Phone OS is forecast to grow its share
over time.17

Desktop and web-based applications
Microsoft Office is the dominant office productivity software suite worldwide.
Links included in Microsoft Office applications can be tracked. Similarly, Google
offers Google Docs as an office productivity suite, which operates entirely online.

Buy data from ISPs
Both major search engines have the ability to buy usage data from ISPs.

Google Analytics
Various studies show a range of market share statistics for Google Analytics. For
example, one study showed 63% of the Fortune 500 companies use Google Analytics on their websites.18

Goo.gl
Since December 2009, Google has offered a URL shortener.

Internet services
Google offers free WiFi service to the city of Mountain View and offers Google
Fiber to a growing number of U.S. cities. Google Fiber is already present or being
installed in Portland (Oregon), San Jose, Salt Lake City, Provo, Phoenix, San
Antonio, Austin, Kansas City, Nashville, Atlanta, Charlotte, and Raleigh-Durham.

Email services
Services like Gmail, Outlook, and Hotmail (now integrated with Outlook) provide
yet another data source.

Payment services
Google Checkout, Google Wallet, and any mobile payment apps running on the
Android OS are another potential source of data.

Potential User Engagement Signals
Each search engine has a rich array of data sources that enable it to measure a wide
range of web surfer behavior. Here are some of the many signals search engines can
extract from those sources:

16 Conner Forrest, “Apple v. Google: The Goliath Deathmatch by the Numbers in 2014,” TechRepub-

lic, March 21, 2014, http://bit.ly/apple_v_google_2014.
17 Michael Blair, “Windows OS Phones Should Increase Market Share in 2014 and Begin to Rival

iOS,” Seeking Alpha, March 6, 2014, http://bit.ly/windows_mkt_share_2014.
18 Charles Farina, “Google Analytics Solidifies Lead in Fortune 500 Adoption in 2013,” E-Nor, Octo-

ber 21, 2013, http://bit.ly/google_analytics_2013.

586

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

Click-through rate (CTR)
The search engines can measure the click-through rate on links presented in
search results, on web pages in URL shorteners, in their browsers, and more.

Clicks on other search results
Once a user completes a search and visits a link, a common behavior indicating a
problem with a result is that she returns to the search results, often quite quickly,
and then clicks on another result.

New search generation
Similarly, a user may look at a given search result, come back to the search
engine, and modify his search query.

Bounce rate
Bounce rate is a measurement of the percentage of users who visit only one page
on a website. Search engines extend that definition to take into account the user’s
interaction with the search results. For example, if a user clicks on a search result,
then returns to the SERPs and clicks on another result, that could indicate that the
first result was not a good response for that search query.

Time on page
Search engines can measure the amount of time spent on a given page using their
browsers or toolbars. This is also referred to as dwell time, and more time on page
might be considered signal of higher quality.

Time on site
Similarly, time on site could be considered a positive signal if the average user
spends more time on your site than she does on the sites of your competitors. Of
course, it could also mean that your site is difficult to navigate or loads very
slowly, so you’d need to look at this signal in conjunction with other signals.

Pages per visit
This metric can be easily measured by the browser, a toolbar, or Google Analytics.
More page views implies greater user engagement with the site; however, some
sites seek to increase page views by paginating their content to generate more ad
impressions. As with time on site, a signal like this is hard to evaluate on a standalone basis.

Repeat visits
Do users return to the site? Return visits could also be viewed as a quality signal.

Pages printed
While many pages on the Web do not lend themselves to printing, certain classes
of pages do, such as reference articles, recipes, maps, and similar content. If a user
decides to print a page, that indicates a higher level of interest in the content.

USER ENGAGEMENT AS A MEASURE OF SEARCH QUALITY

www.it-ebooks.info

587

Pages bookmarked in the user’s browser
If a user bookmarks a page so he can return to it later, that is also a positive signal.

Scroll bar usage
Another relatively subtle indicator of engagement is whether the user scrolls
down to see more of the content on a page.

Voting Mechanisms
Another set of signals that search engines can use involves voting mechanisms. These
are methods by which users directly indicate their approval or disapproval of content.
Here are some examples:

Chrome Blocklist extension
On February 14, 2011, Google released a Chrome extension that allowed users to
block specific websites from their search results. This was not used as a ranking
factor in the initial release of Google’s Panda algorithm on February 24, 2011, but
it was included as part of the second release of Panda on April 11, 2011.

Google+ +1s and Google+ shares of content
As discussed earlier, the evidence does not support these data points being used as
ranking signals just yet (other than for personalized search), but in the future they
could be.

Brand name searches
Another potential signal of prominence is a high number of brand name searches.
For example, brands like Coca-Cola and Pepsi get searched on hundreds of thousands of times per month. This might make them better responses to generic
search queries like cola than lesser-known brands.

Brand mentions
A related concept is that of brand mentions. People reference brand names on the
Web all the time—on web pages, in tweets, and elsewhere—without actually
implementing links to the page of the brand’s website. While there is no documented evidence that search engines use this type of data, frequent brand references could be a strong signal.

Document Analysis
Document analysis is a somewhat different concept than user engagement, but it can
be used to predict how users will perceive the quality of content on a site. Strong signals indicating a likelihood of poor-quality content could potentially be used as a ranking signal by the search engines.

588

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

Poor Editorial Quality
Poor spelling and bad grammar can indicate a lack of attention and care about the content. You must exercise care here, as user-generated content will not necessarily be
checked for spelling or grammar. Publisher authored content that is not subject to
quality editing, however, may indicate low-quality content.

Reading Level
The concept of reading level refers to the estimated grade level of the sophistication of
the writing. One formula for this is known as the Flesch-Kincaid Reading Test, which
measures the average words per sentence and the average syllables per word. It is
actually not a measurement of the education level required to read the content; rather,
you can think of it of as a measurement of the mental effort required to read a sentence.
If you want to check the reading level of a document, you can do so using the spelling
and grammar checker in Microsoft Word. You can also configure Google’s Advanced
Search settings to show the reading level for documents in the search results. This
modifies the results, as shown in Figure 8-44.
There is no single reading level that is optimal for each business; it varies depending
on the nature of the content a site publishes. For example, if you have a site targeted
to children, then a younger reading level is appropriate. Contrast that with content on
the latest advances in artificial intelligence algorithms, where much higher reading
level would be expected.

DOCUMENT ANALYSIS

www.it-ebooks.info

589

Figure 8-44. Reading level shown in Google Results

590

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

Keyword Stuffing/Lack of Synonyms
Keyword stuffing used to be the basic approach of spammers back in the days when
Alta Vista was the leading search engine. There are still many people who believe that
repeating the same keyword over and over on a web page will lead to higher rankings
for that phrase. They create documents that include way too many instances of the
same word, and often don’t make much use of synonyms for the key phrase. This is an
indicator of a focus on search engines and not users, and may correlate with lowerquality documents.

Ad Density and Offensive Ads
Search engines have learned that sites that have too many ads on them offer poor user
experiences. These pages may result in high bounce rates, but in some instances it is
also possible to measure this effect directly. For example, consider the concept of
measuring the percentage of the portion of a page above the fold that is occupied by
ads. Too high a density might be taken as a negative signal. Google also has a patent
on detecting annoying ads and pages, which Bill Slawksi has written about in “How
Google Rejects Annoying Advertisements And Pages”.

Sameness
An exact match search on “mortgage tips” returns hundreds of thousands of results, as
shown in Figure 8-45. It is likely that, of those hundreds of thousands of results, there
is very little variation in the content.

Figure 8-45. Search query returning hundreds of thousands of results

Broaden this concept to consider a site where the majority of articles are written about
topics that many have written on before, and whose authors don’t really bring any

DOCUMENT ANALYSIS

www.it-ebooks.info

591

level of authority to the topic or offer a unique viewpoint. Such a site may be lowered
in rankings, as users likely want to see authoritative opinions from those they trust.

Page Speed
In April 2010, Google announced that a website’s page load time was now considered
a ranking factor. However, Google has indicated that this affects only a small percentage of results (about 1%) and industry tests appear to confirm this, including the
results of an investigation published by Moz.
The bottom line on page speed is that there are a lot of reasons why you should treat it
as important, the biggest of which is the impact it has on conversion and bounce rates
on your site. As an SEO factor, it is likely to have an impact on your results only if you
have a particularly slow site. If that’s the case, the drive to improve your conversion
rate should already be compelling enough to address the issue.

Optimizing User Experience to Improve SEO
There are many reasons to address the user experience on your site, including conversion optimization and customer retention. As we have seen in the sections “User
Engagement as a Measure of Search Quality” on page 584 and “Document Analysis”
on page 588, SEO may also be impacted by the perceived user experience with a site.
Measuring your site performance on these types of metrics can be a great start to
improving the SEO performance of your website.
However, it is important to consider a broader question: What do your visitors want?
If you are selling left-handed golf clubs, and you create a web page to rank on the
search phrase lefty ping putters, what do you offer the visitors who come to that page
from search? Reviews? Images? Videos? Putting tips? The ecommerce catalog front
and center?
This is the most important part of optimizing a user experience. Creating a direct connection between the visitors arriving at your site, and what it is they are looking for.
When you make this harder for them, metrics like bounce rate, time on site, and
repeat visits will all suffer. When you make it easy, all of these metrics will improve.
One strategy is to survey your site visitors. If you don’t have a lot of traffic, consider
using a PPC campaign to bring in a number of visitors and then get them to take the
survey. Next, we outline a three-step process to create a survey to find out from people what they are looking for on your site.

Step 1: Build a Survey
Start with a short series of questions asking the survey taker to imagine he’s just performed the desired query. The basic structure is simple: request the top three content

592

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

pieces your audience desires, then ask specifically about features that would make the
page worthy of sharing (this is important, because it often differs substantively from
what makes a page merely answer the user’s query).
Finally, you can ask him to actually do a search on the target query (you don’t want
him to do it until the end, because what he finds might bias his responses) and report
any results he liked, as these can provide additional insight.

Step 2: Send It to Your Customers/Potential Customers
You can find customers or potential customers virtually anywhere—among your
friends, neighbors, coworkers, or social network connections, through existing SEO
traffic or PPC campaigns, and so on. Anyone who fits your customer demographic or is
creative enough to imagine herself as part of that demographic will work.
A link in the bottom of your email newsletter or a share on Facebook/LinkedIn/Twitter can often do the job, too. You might even try posting a link in a relevant industry
forum or discussion group (so long as you’re sure it won’t be perceived as spammy).

Step 3: Record Responses and Leverage Them to Build What
the People Want
Once you have your results, analyze them to see what you have. If you need things
clarified, repeat the survey. It is better to do this than to act prematurely on incomplete or ambiguous data. Once you have built the site based on users’ feedback, measure the results you get. Don’t be afraid to go back and make more refinements, or
even conduct another survey, to continue to educate yourself about what your visitors
want.

Additional Social Media Resources
In this chapter, we have focused primarily on the interactions between social media
and SEO. However, social media is itself a significant source of traffic. It deserves its
own investigation and study. Here are some of the top resources available online to
help guide you further into the world of social media:
• http://www.socialmediaexaminer.com/
• http://blog.hubspot.com/
• http://socialmouths.com/blog/
• http://socialmediatoday.com/
• http://danzarrella.com/#
• http://www.convinceandconvert.com/blog/

ADDITIONAL SOCIAL MEDIA RESOURCES

www.it-ebooks.info

593

• http://www.razorsocial.com/blog
• http://simplymeasured.com/blog/
• http://maximizesocialbusiness.com/
• http://www.briansolis.com/
• http://www.moz.com/blog
• http://marketingland.com
• http://allfacebook.com
• http://socialtriggers.com
• http://www.ducttapemarketing.com
• http://www.viralblog.com
• http://pushingsocial.com
• http://www.likeable.com/blog/

Conclusion
While it does not appear that social media acts as a direct SEO ranking signal, except
for personalized search and Google+, no one can debate that social media and user
engagement have become significant factors for those practicing SEO. Links may still
be the strongest source of signals to search engines, but these new factors are already
an important part of the digital marketing landscape, and may gain additional weight
over time as the search engines learn to use them better. Thus, a balanced SEO strategy needs to take into account social media, user data, and document analysis
techniques.
In summary, brand publishers must seriously consider these four areas as a part of
their web promotional strategy:
• Participating in social media communities
• Providing an engaging user experience
• Offering unique and differentiated content
• Building a brand
Finding the right balance of these areas is already important for publishers to improve
their conversion and SEO results, and it will only become more important over time.

594

CHAPTER EIGHT: HOW SOCIAL MEDIA AND USER DATA PLAY A ROLE IN SEARCH RESULTS AND RANKINGS

www.it-ebooks.info

