The Thirty-Six Strategies
     By Stefan H. Verstappen
      Cover Design: S. Verstappen
    All Illustrations by S. Verstappen
Copyright © 2017 by Stefan H. Verstappen
            All rights reserved
            Copyright 1999 by
                  Stefan H.
                 Verstappen
        First Edition Published by
           China Books, SF 1999
       ISBN - 978-1-365-55430-8
            Toronto, Canada
The Thirty-Six Strategies                                 Table of Contents
Introduction ..................................................................................................... 1
Strategy 1 Fool the Emperor to Cross the Sea.............................................. 5
Strategy 2 Besiege Wei to Rescue Zhao....................................................... 11
Strategy 3 Kill With a Borrowed Sword ..................................................... 17
Strategy 4 Await the Exhausted Enemy at Your Ease ............................... 21
Strategy 5 Loot a Burning House ................................................................ 25
Strategy 6 Clamor in the East, Attack in the West .................................... 29
Strategy 7 Create Something from Nothing ............................................... 33
Strategy 8 Openly Repair the Walkway, Secretly March to Chencang ... 37
Strategy 9 Observe the Fire on the Opposite Shore ................................... 43
Strategy 10 Hide Your Dagger Behind A Smile ......................................... 47
Strategy 11 Sacrifice the Plum Tree in Place of the Peach ........................ 51
Strategy 12 Seize the Opportunity to Lead a Sheep Away ........................ 55
Strategy 13 Beat the Grass to Startle the Snake ......................................... 61
Strategy 14 Borrow a Corpse to Raise the Spirit ....................................... 65
Strategy 15 Lure the Tiger Down the Mountain ........................................ 71
Strategy 16 To Catch Something, First Let It Go ...................................... 75
Strategy 17 Toss Out A Brick To Attract Jade .......................................... 79
Strategy 18 To Catch The Bandits First Capture Their Leader ............... 83
Strategy 19 Steal the Firewood From Under the Pot ................................. 89
Strategy 20 Trouble the Water to Catch the Fish ...................................... 95
Strategy 21 Shed Your Skin Like The Golden Cicada ...............................99
Strategy 22 Shut the Door to Catch the Thief ...........................................105
Strategy 23 Befriend A Distant Enemy To Attack One Nearby ..............109
Strategy 24 Borrow The Road To Conquer Guo ......................................113
Strategy 25 Replace The Beams With Rotten Timbers ............................117
Strategy 26 Point At The Mulberry But Curse The Locust Tree ............123
Strategy 27 Feign Madness, But Keep Your Balance ...............................129
Strategy 28 Lure Your Enemy Onto The Roof, Then Take Away The
Ladder...........................................................................................................135
Strategy 29 Tie Silk Blossoms To The Dead Tree .....................................141
Strategy 30 Exchange The Role Of Guest For That Of Host ...................147
Strategy 31 The Strategy Of Beautiful Women .........................................155
Strategy 32 The Strategy Of Open City Gates ..........................................161
Strategy 33 The Strategy Of Sowing Discord ............................................165
Strategy 34 The Strategy Of Injuring Yourself .........................................171
Strategy 35 The Strategy Of Combining Tactics ......................................175
Strategy 36 If All Else Fails, Retreat ..........................................................181
Chronological Tables ...................................................................................185
Bibliography .................................................................................................187
Index .............................................................................................................195
   About the Author ......................................................................................199
                                                               Introduction
                            Introduction
The Thirty-Six Strategies is a unique collection of ancient Chinese
proverbs that describe some of the most cunning and subtle war tactics
ever devised.
Whereas other Chinese military texts such as Sun Zi's The Art Of War
focus on military organization, leadership, and battlefield tactics, the
Thirty-Six Strategies are more suitably applied in the fields of politics,
diplomacy, and espionage.
These proverbs describe not only battlefield strategies, but tactics used
in psychological warfare to undermine both the enemy's will to fight
and his sanity. Tactics such as the 'double cross,' the 'frame job,' and the
'bait and switch,' can be traced back through thousands of years of
Chinese history to such proverbs as Hide the Dagger Behind a Smile,
Kill With a Borrowed Sword, and Toss Out a Brick to Attract Jade,
respectively.
Though other Chinese military works of strategy have at least paid lip
service to the Confucian notion of honor, the Thirty-Six Strategies
make no pretense of being anything but ruthless.
For the Western reader the Thirty-Six Strategies offers timeless insights
into the workings of human nature under conditions of extreme stress.
                                                                           1
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Many of the proverbs are based on events that occurred during China's
Warring States Period (403-221 B.C.). This was a time so infamous
that a later emperor banned history books of that era on the grounds
that they contained accounts of such a devious nature, they would
morally corrupt all who read them. Many of those accounts are
presented here along with the exploits of some of the Orient's greatest
generals, kings, emperors, and shoguns.
Over 118 anecdotes are included to both explain and offer examples of
each strategy's application. By learning from the old masters of the art
of deception, one is better able to spot the modern pretenders, for,
though the players come and go, the game remains the same.
History of the Thirty-Six Strategies
The origin of the Thirty-Six Strategies are unknown. No author or
compiler has ever been mentioned, and no date as to when it may have
been written has been ascertained.
The first historical mention of the Thirty-Six Strategies dates back to
the Southern Qi dynasty (A.D. 489-537) where it is mentioned in the
Nan Qi Shi (History of the Southern Chi Dynasty). It briefly records,
"Of the 36 stratagems of Master Tan, running away is the best."
Master Tan may be the famous General Tan Daoji (d. A.D. 436), but
there is no evidence to either prove or disprove his authorship. While
this is the first recorded mention of Thirty-Six Strategies, some of the
proverbs themselves are based on events that occurred up to seven
hundred years earlier. For example, the strategy Openly Repair the
Walkway, Secretly March to Chencang is based on a tactic allegedly
used by the founder of the Han dynasty, Gaozu, to escape from Sichuan
in 223 B.C.
The strategy Besiege Wei to Rescue Zhao is named after an incident
that took place even earlier, in 352 B.C., and is attributed to the famous
strategist Sun Bin.
All modern versions of the Thirty-Six Strategies are derived from a
tattered book discovered at a roadside vendor's stall in Sichuan in 1941.
2
                                                             Introduction
It turned out to be a reprint of an earlier book dating back to the late
Ming or early Qing dynasty entitled, The Secret Art Of War, The
Thirty-Six Strategies. There was no mention of who the authors or
compilers were or when it was originally published. A reprint was first
published for the public in Beijing in 1979. Since then several Chinese
and English language versions have been published in China, Hong
Kong, and Taiwan.
Without any other information, current speculations about the origin of
the Thirty-Six Strategies suggest that there was no single author. More
likely, the book derived from a collection of idiomatic expressions
taken from popular Chinese folklore, history, and myths.
They may have first been recorded by General Tan and handed down
verbally or in manuscript form for centuries. It is believed that
sometime in the early Qing dynasty some enterprising editor collected
them and published them in the form that comes down to us today.
Notes on the Text
The original text of The Secret Art of War, The Thirty-Six Strategies is
rather short, comprising only 138 Chinese characters. It merely names
each strategy followed by a brief explanation. The book was divided
into six categories of six strategies each. The six categories are said to
correspond to six situations as follows: Stratagems when in a superior
position; Stratagems for confrontation; Stratagems for attack;
Stratagems for confused situations; Stratagems for gaining ground; and
Stratagems for desperate situations.
This division is based on the hexagrams of the I-Ching (a hexagram
being a grouping of six broken or unbroken lines). In addition, the
explanation of each strategy is likewise said to be based on the
interpretation of each hexagram as found in the I-Ching.
Initially all this seemed to imply an almost scientific approach, but on
closer examination I found the structure flawed. My guess is that
elements of I-Ching numerology were added at some time merely to
create an aura of mystery and antiquity (not an uncommon practice
among publishers during the Ming and Qing dynasties). Since the six
subtitles did little to improve understanding, I did not use them in
                                                                         3
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
compiling the present text, but kept to the original sequence of
strategies.
I used anecdotes primarily from both China's and Japan's 'Warring
States' eras, since, though separated by more than a thousand years,
those eras most closely reflected the tone of the strategies. My
apologies to serious scholars for I rewrote the explanations and
historical anecdotes so that they would be clearer to Western readers.
Any mistakes and errors are my own. I also added opening quotes from
other Oriental works on strategy, and a summary. The resultant
manuscript is not a direct translation, nor a list of historical facts, but
rather a retelling of Chinese folklore, or more specifically military lore.
4
                           Strategy 1 -Fool the Emperor To Cross the Sea
                         Mán Tiān Guò Hǎi
                               Strategy 1
             Fool the Emperor to Cross the Sea
     In conflicts that involve large numbers of people, it is
     possible to get the opponent to become lax in their guard.
     When they are in a state of agitation and show signs of
     impatience, appear as if nothing is bothering you and put
     forth an easygoing, relaxed stance.
     When you perceive that the mood has been transferred (to
     your opponent), you have a chance to achieve victory by
     making a strong attack with as much speed as possible.
     Miyamoto Musashi, The Book of Five Rings
Moving about in the darkness and shadows, occupying isolated places,
or hiding behind screens will only attract suspicious attention. To lower
                                                                        5
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
an enemy's guard you must act in the open, hiding your true intentions
under the guise of common every day activities.1
Warring States Period China
In 225 B.C. the state of Qin, having slowly increased its power over the
past hundred years, now felt powerful enough to overcome its
remaining opponents in open aggression. The most powerful of the
remaining states was Chu.
The king of Qin sent his renowned general Wang Jian to attack and
conquer Chu. A year earlier Qin had sent another general, Li Xing, who
suffered a humiliating defeat at the hands of Chu.
The older and more experienced general Wang Jian wasn't going to
make the same mistake as his predecessor and decided against invading
the country directly. Instead, he stopped just inside Qin's border with
Chu and built a fortified stockade. The king of Chu called upon his
allies to muster all available troops and rush them to the opposite side
of the border.
Confident from their previous victory, the Chu commanders rode out
each day to challenge Wang to come out and fight, but Wang ignored
the taunts. Instead, Wang was observed swimming with his men in
nearby rivers and lakes, or on leisurely picnics in the forest. At night
there was feasting with singing and dancing. In addition, Wang focused
his efforts on improving the morale and training of his troops.
1 The origin of this strategy is said to come from an incident involving the
Tang Dynasty emperor Tai Zhong. The emperor was on campaign against the
Koreans. His grneral advised crossing the Yellow Sea to the Korean
Penninsula so that they would be able to surprise the Koreans from behind
their lines. The plan had only one flaw - the emperor deathly afraid of large
bodies of water. The generals divised a scheme where the decorated a large
ship like a country estate and had banners hung all roundso that you could not
see the ocean. Then theytold the emperor that a local aristocrat cordially
invited the emperor to dine at his estate. Oncce aboard, the emperor was dined
and entertained throughout the night while the ship silently set sail. The next
morning they arrived at their destination with the emperor none the wiser.
6
                            Strategy 1 -Fool the Emperor To Cross the Sea
After several months, the Chu army was beginning to grow weary of
the game. One of the Chu commanders said, "Wang Jian has been sent
to attack Chu, but it seems he is getting too old and he no longer has
the heart for it. It is obvious that he has no intention of attacking, but is
here merely to save face." Others agreed and many of the troops were
sent back to their countries.
Wang Jian had waited behind his stockade almost an entire year before
the last of the Chu troops also gave up waiting for his attack and broke
camp to return to the capital. It was then that Wang ordered his men to
suddenly sally forth and attack the retreating Chu. Because a retreating
army is vulnerable to attack, coupled with the element of surprise, the
Chu suffered severe losses and its general was slain.
The king of Chu wasn't able to reassemble all his remaining troops in
time, as Wang Jian swiftly invaded and conquered the entire kingdom.
Four years later the king of Qin became the first emperor of China, Qin
Shihuangdi.
Warring States Period China
General Li Mu was given the command responsible for defending
Yanmen against the Xiongnu (Nomadic horsemen that occupied the
central Asian steppes to the north and west of China.) who were
constantly raiding the territories.
When Li Mu first arrived at his new command, everyone expected him
to begin by launching attacks on the local tribes. But he did no such
thing. Instead, he focused his efforts on training and nurturing the
border troops, ensuring they were well fed and paid. He further ordered
that, should the Xiongnu attack, all troops were to retreat into one of
the fortified towns that were scattered throughout the countryside and
merely defend. Under no circumstances were they to engage the enemy.
For years, anytime a Xiongnu raiding party entered the territory they
found the people and soldiers already holed-up behind defensive walls
with precious little left in the countryside to plunder. Eventually the
Xiongnu and even Li Mu's own soldiers thought that, though he was a
virtuous commander, he was also a coward. The border troops, after
years of training without engaging in battle, became restless for combat.
                                                                            7
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
When Li Mu saw the eagerness for battle amongst his troops, he
decided to act. First, he sent his best troops to set up an ambush several
days march away. Then he had herds of cattle and their drivers released
to graze in the fields with only a few soldiers to watch over them.
When a Xiongnu raiding party happened upon the cattle, they attacked
and sent the soldiers fleeing. The raiding party sent word back to their
Khan that the Chinese had abandoned the country leaving herds of
cattle and lightly defended villages behind.
The Khan raised a tremendous host to invade the Chinese territory.
Expecting no resistance from the 'cowardly' Li Mu, they were easily led
into the ambush. More than a hundred thousand Xiongnu horsemen
were killed. For ten years thereafter, not a single raiding party dared
cross the border.
Japanese Folk Tale
There once lived a samurai who was plagued by a large and clever rat
who had the run of the house. This annoyed the samurai to no end so he
went to the village to buy a cat. A street vendor sold him a cat that he
said would catch the rat, and indeed the cat looked trim and fit. But the
rat was even quicker than the cat and after a week with no success the
samurai returned the cat. This time the vendor pulled out a large and
grizzled cat and guaranteed that no rat could escape this master mouser.
The rat knew enough to stay clear of this tough alley cat, but when the
cat slept, the rat ran about. Half the day the rat would hide, but the
other half he again had the run of the place. The samurai brought the
cat back to the vendor who shook his head in despair saying he had
given the samurai his best cat and there was nothing more he could do.
Returning home with his money, the samurai happened upon a monk
and sought his advice. After hearing the samurai's story the monk
offered him the services of the cat that lived in the temple. The cat was
old and fat and he scarcely seemed to notice when he was carried away
by the doubtful samurai.
For two weeks, the cat did little more than sleep all day and night. The
samurai wanted to give the cat back to the temple but the monk insisted
8
                            Strategy 1 -Fool the Emperor To Cross the Sea
he keep him a while longer assuring him the rat's days were close to an
end.
The rat became accustomed to the presence of the lazy old cat and was
soon up to his old tricks even, on occasion, brazenly dancing around
the old cat as he slept. Then one day, as the rat went about his business
without any concern, he passed close by the cat who swiftly struck out
his paw and pinned the rat to the floor.
The rat died instantly.
Summary
In battle, the element of surprise is paramount. A wary opponent is
unlikely to fall into the usual traps, so he must first be made to relax his
vigilance. To do this one must carry on as though nothing untoward
was afoot.
Once acclimatized to often repeated actions, a person no longer takes
notice of them.2 When the enemy ceases to pay attention to you, the
time is right to attack.
2 In psychology this phenominom is known as habituation; the more often you
are exposed to a stimulation, the less sensitive you become to it.
                                                                           9
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
10
                                                Besiege Wei to Rescue Zhao
                          Wéi Wèi Jiù Zhào
                                 Strategy 2
                   Besiege Wei to Rescue Zhao
      Attack where he is unprepared, appear where unexpected.
      Sun Zi, The art of War
When the enemy is too strong to attack directly, then attack something
he holds dear. Know that in all things he cannot be superior.
Somewhere there is a gap in the armor, a weakness that can be attacked
instead. If the enemy is on campaign, his home defense will be weak, if
his army is fast, his baggage trains will be slow, if the army well
equipped, the treasury will be at a loss. 3
3 During the incessant fueding between the various kingdoms of the Warring
States period, any kingdom that attacked another was in danger of being
attacked by a third kingdom from the rear. This strategy was used to maintain
a certain degree of military status quo. If any one kingdom attacked another,
the rest would sit back and watch the outcome. But if it looked like one
kingdom was becoming too powerful, the other states would unite to cut the
                                                                           11
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Warring States Period China
This strategy derives its name from a famous incident that occurred in
354 B.C. At this time one of China's most renowned strategists, Sun
Bin, (a descendent of Sun Zi) was an advisor to the king of Qi. Sun had
earlier been at the court of Wei, but another minister, Pang Juan,
became jealous of Sun's cleverness. Through court intrigues, he had
Sun framed as a spy, sentenced to mutilation, and imprisoned. Sun
escaped (see Chapter 27) and fled to Qi.
Several years later, the king of Wei appointed the same Pang Juan as
commander of the army and sent him to attack the capital of Zhao. The
king of Zhao immediately appealed to Qi for help.
The king of Qi consulted his advisors who all spoke in favor of rushing
to aid their ally, only Sun Bin recommended against attacking.
Sun advised, "To intervene between two warring armies is like trying to
divert a tidal wave by standing in its path. It would be better to wait
until both armies have worn themselves out."
The king agreed to wait. The siege of Zhao had lasted more than a year
when Sun Bin decided the time was ripe to come to Zhao's aid. The
king of Qi appointed Prince Tian Ji as general and Sun as military
advisor.
Tian Ji wanted to attack the Wei forces directly to lift the siege of Zhao,
but again Sun advised against direct intervention saying, "Since most of
Wei's troops are out of the country engaged in the siege, their own
defense must be weak. By attacking the capital of Wei, we will force the
army to return to defend their own capital thereby lifting the siege of
Zhao while destroying the Wei forces in turn."
ambitious state down to size. This went on for several hundred years, but in
the end, the Warring States rulers neglected this strategy and the kingdom of
Qin was finally able to conquer all of China.
12
                                             Besiege Wei to Rescue Zhao
Tian Ji agreed to the plan and divided his army into two parts, one to
attack the capital of Wei, and the other to prepare an ambush along the
route to the capital.
When the Wei general Pang Juan heard that the capital was being
attacked, he rushed his army back to its defense. Weakened and
exhausted from the year-long siege and the forced march, the Wei
troops were completely caught by surprise in the ambush and suffered
heavy losses.
Zhao was thus rescued while Pang Juan barely escaped back to Wei to
recoup his losses. Sun Bin would later defeat his nemesis Pang Juan
using another classic strategy (see Chapter 28)
Han Dynasty China
After having defeated Wei, the Han general, Han Xin, led his army
through the Jing River gorge to subdue Zhao. The king of Zhao in turn
mobilized his army and set up fortified positions just in front of the
mouth of the gorge where the Han army would have to exit.
Han Xin, knowing the most logical place for an ambush would be at the
exit, halted his army some thirty Li 4 from the mouth.
During the night, Han Xin ordered two thousand of his light cavalry to
muffle their horse's hooves and secretly make their way through
underbrush to set up an observation post overlooking the enemy's
encampment. Each man was furthermore instructed to carry a red flag.
Han Xin told his commanders, "When the Zhao forces see me march
out, they are sure to abandon their fortifications and come in pursuit.
Then you must enter their walls with all speed, tear down the Zhao
flags, and set up the red flags of Han instead."
The next day Han Xin ordered the main body of his army to line up
with their backs against the river. When the Zhao troops saw this they
rejoiced in their assured victory since it was a well- known rule of war
to never fight with water at your back.
4 One li equals approximately 0.3 miles.
                                                                      13
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Han Xin moved first, launching an attack against the Zhao positions.
After a while the Han feigned a retreat and fled back to the main body
still lined up along the river. The Zhao forces, feeling confident in their
advantage of terrain and superior numbers, pursued the Han to the river
where they engaged in a fierce battle.
As Han Xin had anticipated, the Zhao forces completely abandoned
their camp leaving only a handful of soldiers behind. When the Han
cavalrymen hiding in the mountains saw the Zhao army deserting their
camp, they knew the time had come.
They charged down the mountain, entered the compound and quickly
killed the remaining Zhao guards. Then they tore down the Zhao
banners and replaced them with the red flags of Han.
Meanwhile, the Zhao forces were unable to gain any advantage in the
desperate fighting along the river, and so were about to retreat to their
camp when they saw the Han flags flying behind the ramparts.
The Zhao soldiers, believing that the Han had already captured their
leaders, panicked and fled in all directions to escape.
The Han then closed in from both the river and the camp to attack on
two fronts, inflicting a severe defeat and capturing the king of Zhao.
Warring States Period China
Duke Wen of Qin had decided to invade Wei, so he called in the feudal
nobles to lay out his plans for attack. However, he was interrupted by
the laughter coming from one of the nobles named Kong Zichu.
"May I ask the source of your amusement?" asked the duke.
"I was laughing at a man in my neighborhood and some gossip I
heard," replied Kong. "It seems one day he was walking home with his
wife when he spotted a lovely maiden gathering mulberry leaves by the
roadside. No sooner did he escape his wife to go flirt with the girl when,
upon turning around, he saw another man making love to his wife. I
was just thinking about the story and I couldn't help but laugh."
14
                                           Besiege Wei to Rescue Zhao
Seeing the moral of this story Duke Wen canceled his invasion plans
and recalled his army from its march. No sooner had the Qin army
returned when they were sent out to stop an invasion on their own
northern border by an unexpected enemy.
Summary
To confront a powerful opponent in a head-to-head contest of strength
is the most costly and least favorable method of war. Instead, while the
enemy is preoccupied with other objectives you attack something of
value that he has left behind unguarded. When he is forced to break off
his current campaign in order to rescue what he has lost, you can lead
his disheartened forces into a trap.
                                                                      15
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
16
                                              Kill With A Borrowed Sword
                           Jiè Dāo Shā Rén
                                Strategy 3
                  Kill With a Borrowed Sword
     If you are limited in your own strength, then borrow the
     strength of the enemy. If you cannot neutralize an enemy,
     borrow an enemy's knife to do so. If you have no generals,
     borrow those of the enemy.
     Sun Zi, The Art of War
When you do not have the means to attack your enemy directly, then
attack using the strength of another. Trick an ally into attacking him,
bribe an official to turn traitor, or use the enemy's own strength against
him.
Spring And Autumn Period China
The duke of Zheng wanted to invade the state of Kuai. To prepare for
his invasion he first sent out spies to find out who were the most
capable military advisors at the Kuai court.
                                                                        17
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Once he had a list of names, the duke had a rumour spread among his
troops saying that victory was assured since he had Kuai's best generals
secretly on his side.
He also had a decree drawn up promising these generals that, once he
had conquered Kuai, they would all be richly rewarded with titles and
territories. To back up his promise he had the decree enshrined in a
local temple were everyone could see it.
Naturally the king of Kuai had spies in Zheng's army and they reported
the names of the alleged treacherous generals to the king. Believing his
trusted advisors were preparing to betray him, the king of Kuai had
them all executed.
When the duke of Zheng heard of the executions, he launched his
attack. The king of Kuai became alarmed at the sudden invasion of his
territory and called his army staff together to mount a counter attack.
But the recent executions had eliminated all his capable leaders. The
remaining junior officers were inexperienced and unsure of how to
respond. Their hesitation cost the king his throne, and his head.
Warring States Period China
Chang Tuo defected from Western Zhou and went to Eastern Zhou
where he revealed all of Western Zhou's state secrets. Eastern Zhou
rejoiced while Western Zhou was furious.
Minister Feng Chu said to the king of Western Zhou, "I can assassinate
that man if your highness will give me thirty catties of gold."
The king consented and the next day Feng Chu sent an agent to the
Eastern Zhou court bearing the gold and a letter addressed to Chang
Tuo.
The letter read, "This is to remind Chang Tuo that you must complete
your mission as soon as possible, for the longer the delay the more
likely you will be found out."
18
                                            Kill With A Borrowed Sword
However, before the first agent departed, Feng Chu sent another agent
to the Eastern Zhou border guards informing them that a spy would be
crossing the border that night.
When the first agent arrived at the border he was stopped and searched.
The border guards found the gold and the letter to Chang Tuo and
turned them over to their court officials. Shortly afterwards Chang Tuo
was executed.
Chinese Folk Tale
One day a fox was wandering through the woods preoccupied in
thought when he was suddenly surprised by a tiger who seemed intent
on eating him. It being too late to run away, the fox had to think
quickly.
Nonchalantly he asked, "Tiger why are you here, are you not afraid of
me?"
"Why should I be afraid of you?" asked the tiger.
"Because I am the king of the jungle," said the fox.
"Ridiculous!" replied the Tiger. "I am king of the jungle."
"Well if you don't believe me I'll prove it. Just follow me as I walk
about the jungle and see for yourself if the other animals do not run
away at my approach."
The tiger agreed and so the fox set off with the tiger following closely
behind. As the other animals spotted the fox they also saw the tiger and
they ran away.
After a while the fox turned to the tiger and said, "See how they scatter
when I approach. Do you believe me now?"
"It seems I was wrong," said the perplexed Tiger, and he sulked away
into the jungle.
                                                                       19
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Summary
To succeed in any endeavour one must be frugal in expending one's
resources. Where possible, use trickery and deception to appropriate the
strength of others while conserving your own.
20
                                 Await the Exhausted Enemy at Your Ease
                             Yǐ Yì Dài Láo
                                Strategy 4
         Await the Exhausted Enemy at Your Ease
      Whoever is first in the field and awaits the coming of the
      enemy will be fresh for the fight, whoever is second in the
      field and has to hasten into formation will fight already
      exhausted.
      Sun Zi, The Art of War
It is an advantage to choose the time and place for battle. In this way
you know when and where the battle will take place, while your enemy
does not. Encourage your enemy to expend his energy in futile quests
while you conserve your strength. When he is exhausted and confused,
you attack with energy and purpose.
Spring and Autumn Period China
In 684 B.C. the state of Qi attacked the state of Lu. When the two
armies met at Changshao, Duke Zhuang of Lu wanted to beat the drums
and begin his advance, but he was dissuaded by his chief advisor Cao
                                                                     21
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Cui who said, "Not yet." Only after the Qi troops had beaten their
drums three times did Cao cry, "Now is the time to beat ours!"
The Lu troops then charged and defeated the Qi. The duke was eager to
pursue the retreating Qi troops when he was again stopped by Cao who
said, "Not yet." Cao then dismounted his chariot and went to inspect the
tracks made by the retreating Qi troops. When he climbed back aboard
he said, "All right, let's pursue them." The Qi troops were thus driven
out of the Lu territory.
After the victory was won the duke asked Cao Cui the reason for his
actions, to which Cao Cui replied,
"In battle, it is all a matter of morale. The first beating of the drum is to
rouse the soldiers to action.
If no action is taken, then, at the second beating, their morale begins to
dwindle, and at the third it is gone. When the enemy was at the end of
their enthusiasm, we were at the peak of ours. That is the time to
attack.”
“Because of this we were able to defeat them. But in dealing with
seasoned generals it is often difficult to see through their tactics. I was
therefore afraid that they might have made an ambush ready for us.
But when I found that during their retreat their chariot tracks were
disorderly and their banners discarded, I knew we could chase them
out."
Spring and Autumn Period China
In 628 B.C. the commander of a Qin division stationed in the capital of
their ally, the state of Zheng, saw an opportunity to "lead a sheep
away" and sent a message to his ruler, Duke Mu.
He reported that the Zheng officials had entrusted his division with the
keys and defence of the north gate, therefore if the duke were to
secretly send an army, the Qin garrison could attack from inside and
open the gates, thus easily taking the city.
22
                                Await the Exhausted Enemy at Your Ease
Duke Mu consulted his advisor, Jian Shu, on his plan to secretly attack
Zheng and the latter replied,
"I have never heard of wearing out an army attempting to make a
surprise attack on a distant state.
If our army is worn out and its strength exhausted while the ruler of the
distant state has prepared for our attack, will the outcome not be
disaster?
If our army knows where it's going, certainly Zheng will find out as
well, after traveling a thousand li, who could fail to guess our
intentions?"
But the Duke ignored this advice and ordered his troops to mobilize. As
the army rode out the gate they passed the old advisor who stood
weeping by the roadside.
When asked why he was crying, Jian Shu replied, "I see the army
marching out and my son with it, but I will see neither return. If Jin (a
rival kingdom) should decide to intervene they will intercept you at the
Yao Pass. It is there that I shall go to retrieve your bones."
As the old advisor predicted, Zheng discovered the plot and the Qin
collaborators fled to distant parts. When the Qin army arrived they
discovered Zheng well prepared to meet them. Seeing no way to
capture the capital, the Qin army turned for home stopping along the
way to wipe out the small state of Hua.
Meanwhile, in the state of ]in , which was an ally of the now defunct
state of Hua, the commander Yuan Zhen was enraged by the actions of
Qin.
He said to the king, "Qin has ignored Jian Shu's advice and has worn
out its people on a mission of greed. Heaven presents us with this
opportunity, and an opportunity thus presented must not be lost! One
must not allow the enemy to escape, for to do so means trouble in the
future. We must attack the Qin army."
                                                                       23
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
The king was persuaded and the order was issued to attack. The Qin
army was soundly defeated at the Yao Pass.
Chinese Folk Tale
Emperor Xuan of Zhou loved to gamble on cock fights and kept a
stable of specially bred fighting roosters. Although they were strong
and fierce they would nevertheless lose against the roosters trained by
Ji Xingze. The emperor therefore hired Ji to train his roosters.
Ten days had passed when the emperor went to the stables to ask if
they were ready to fight.
"No," said Ji. "They are far too fierce and proud of their strength. They
rush to attack even the slightest noise."
After another ten days passed the emperor returned to inquire again.
"Not yet. They are still haughty and jump at everything that moves."
After another ten days the emperor again asked the question.
"No, still not yet. Although they no longer rush to attack, they still raise
their hackles and stare fiercely at the slightest provocation."
After yet another ten days the emperor again asked if the roosters were
ready.
"Yes, they are nearly ready. Although some still crow from time to time,
none ever change their countenance. From a distance they appear as
steady is if they were made of wood. Before them, their untrained
opponents would not dare accept their challenge and could only turn
back and run."
Summary
While there are circumstances when it is necessary for an army to hurry
to the battlefield in order to command the advantage of terrain, or
weather, it is more often a mistake to rush to battle without a definite
advantage for doing so.
24
                                                   Loot a Burning House
                           Chèn Huǒ Dǎ Jié
                               Strategy 5
                       Loot a Burning House
     Now, when your army is exhausted and your resources are
     spent, this is the time that new opponents enter the field to
     take advantage of your weakness. No matter how clever the
     leader is, once this situation has come about, the end is
     inevitable.
     Sun Zi, The Art of War
When a country is beset by internal conflicts, when disease and famine
ravage the population, when corruption and crime are rampant, then it
will be unable to deal with an outside threat. This is the time to attack.
Spring and Autumn Period China
In the year 499 B.C. the king of Wu, Fu Chai, conquered the state of
Yue and captured its king, Gou Jian. Rather than have him executed,
the king of Wu made the deposed king of Yue work as a stable boy
cleaning the imperial stables.
                                                                         25
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
After three years, the king of Wu was feeling quite invincible and
released Gou Jian to return to his country to serve as a vassal to the
state of Wu.
Once back in his home country, Gou Jian set about rebuilding his
economy and reputation. Through his benevolent rule, the people
prospered and upstanding counselors and commanders were drawn to
his court to offer their services. After seven years of enlightened rule,
Gou Jian knew that his citizens and his commanders would be willing
to suffer even the hardships of war for his cause.
To prepare for the impending attack on Wu, Gou Jian began with The
Strategy of Sowing Discord (see Chapter 33). First, he bribed Wu's
chief minister with eight beautiful women and a thousand pieces of
gold. Next, he had false evidence planted against Wu's chief councilor
who was thereby forced to commit suicide.
Then fate provided Gou Jian with another strategy. That year Wu was
experiencing a severe drought and the people were hungry. The king of
Wu had spent copiously from his treasury in order to build a new
palace and was reluctant to provide relief.
Seizing the opportunity, Gou Jian sent a tribute consisting of a huge
shipment of building materials with full honor guard in parade dress.
This ostentatious display of wealth slowly wound its way through the
hardest hit areas of the drought. The impoverished peasantry, seeing
that the king was spending the treasury on lumber for his palace instead
of rice for his starving subjects, began a revolt.
The fatally arrogant king of Wu still balked at the earnest advice to
send provisions to the drought ridden provinces, and sent out the army
instead. This left the Wu capital poorly defended. As soon as his spies
had reported on this, Guo Jian launched an attack on the capital of
Wu.
The king of Wu woke the next day to find his city surrounded and his
army far away on campaign. Left with no able commanders and only
the advice of the few ineffectual courtiers that survived his purges, the
king fled into the countryside where he was dealt with later (see
26
                                                  Loot a Burning House
Chapter 22). Thus, the king of Yue looted the burning house of Wu by
setting the spark.
Warring States Period China
Qi and Han were allies when Zhang Yi attacked Han with the combined
forces of Qin and Wei. Han asked Qi for assistance.
The king of Qi said, "Han is our ally and since Qin has attacked her we
must go to her rescue."
But his minister Su Tianchen disagreed saying, "Your majesty's
planning is faulty. You should merely agree to assist Han but take no
action there.
However, in the kingdom of Yan, their king has recently resigned the
throne to his despised prime minister. This has enraged both the noble
houses and the common people causing turmoil at court.
Now, if Qin attacks Han, Chu and Zhao will surely come to her aid,
and this will be as good as heaven bestowing Yan upon us."
The king approved and promised the Han envoy assistance before
sending him back to Han believing he had Qi's backing.
When Qin attacked Han, Chu and Zhao intervened as expected. While
all the major kingdoms were thus engaged in the battle for Han, Qi
stealthily attacked Yan. Within thirty days, Yan was captured.
Six Dynasties Period China
It is written that King Hou Zhuwei of Northern Qi employed perverse
sycophants to govern the realm and exercise control over planning.
Each of these men in turn maintained their own personal factions,
promoting their own cronies outside the normal order.
The laws were relaxed, official matters advanced by wealth, lawsuits
were concluded through bribes, and chaotic government harmed the
people. Subsequently these actions brought about the specter of drought
and flooding rains, while raiders and thieves both increased. Moreover,
                                                                     27
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
the ruler was suspicious and jealous of other kings so that they suffered
harm even though they were innocent. Several high officials fell under
suspicion and were executed even though they had not committed any
crime.
Gradually the signs of corruption and decay were being manifest so that
the end was in sight. Shortly thereafter, the emperor Wu of Northern
Zhou took advantage of the situation to attack and exterminate the
kingdom of Northern Qi. 5
Summary
The death of every civilization is brought on by three events: starvation,
disease, and war. A culture suffering from any two becomes the target
for the third. An ancient proverb states that when a tiger is sick or
wounded, jackals gather nearby.
5 “Drought and Rain” is a reference to Chinas’ dike and canal system that was
the expensive and ongoing responsibility of the central governments. If the
government was lax in its maintenance, and allowed the system to fall into
disrepair, then irrigated areas would suffer drought while silt on the river beds
would build up until the river overflowed the dikes flooding the lowlands. The
degree o which this system was maintained was considered an indicator of the
stability of the government.
28
                                   Clamor in the East, Attack in the West
                          Shēng Dōng Jī Xī
                                Strategy 6
          Clamor in the East, Attack in the West
     The spot where we intend to fight must not be made known,
     for then the enemy will have to prepare against a possible
     attack at different points and his forces will then be spread
     out too thin. For, if the enemy should strengthen his van, he
     will weaken his rear. Should he strengthen his rear, he will
     weaken his van.
     Sun Zi, The Art of War
In any battle, the element of surprise can provide an overwhelming
advantage. Even when face-to-face with an enemy, surprise can still be
employed by attacking where he least expects it. To do this you must
create an expectation in the enemy's mind through the use of a feint.
                                                                      29
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
If you plan to attack on the right flank, you first maneuver your left, if
you wish to invade, you first pretend to improve your defense, if you
intend to hold your ground, make a display of packing up.
Three Kingdoms Period China
In A.D. 200 rival warlords, Yuan Shao and the infamous Cao Cao met
at what would be the battle of Guandu. The numerically superior forces
of Yuan Shao sent a division to attack the small city of Baima situated
to the rear of Cao Cao's army. Yuan Shao hoped this maneuver would
cut off his enemy's communications, supply lines, and avenue of escape,
thus ending their long rivalry.
When reports came in that Baima was under siege, Cao Cao called
together his advisors to plan a way out of their precarious situation.
They could not go directly to Baima since they would be vastly
outnumbered, yet they could not allow Yuan Shao to occupy such a
strategic position.
Then one advisor suggested a feint against Yuan Shao's old stronghold
at the city of Ye. Cao Cao agreed to this plan and personally led the
army towards Ye.
When Yuan Shao heard that Cao Cao had crossed the river and was
heading towards Ye, he and half of his forces went with the intention of
trapping Cao Cao between the Ye garrison in the front and his
reinforcements from the rear.
Meanwhile, Cao Cao had reversed directions in the middle of the night
and, through a forced march, arrived at Baima before dawn. There
Yuan Shao's remaining troops were completely taken by surprise and
annihilated using the very strategy Yuan Shao hoped to use at Ye.
When Yuan Shao reached Ye, he found no one had seen nor heard of
any invading army. Realizing he had been tricked, Yuan Shao turned
his army around to return to Baima. On the way back, Yuan Shao
learned that his general had been killed and the siege lifted. Realizing
he had lost the engagement, Yuan Shao returned to his old stronghold
30
                                   Clamor in the East, Attack in the West
of Ye to recoup his losses. However, in the end he would lose all to
China's most notoriously cunning strategist, Cao Cao.
Song Dynasty China
Once there was an official who was transferred to the capital.
The front part of the inn where he stayed was a teahouse, and across the
street was a shop that sold expensive dyed silks. Whenever he had
nothing to do, he would sit at a table watching the people and activity
on the street.
One day he noticed with surprise that several suspicious looking
characters were walking back and forth observing the silk shop with
great interest.
One of them came up to his table and whispered, "We're in the robbery
business and we're here to steal those fine silks. Since you noticed us, I
came to ask you not to mention it."
"That has nothing to do with me," the official replied. "Why should I
say anything about it?"
The fellow thanked him and left.
The official thought to himself, "The silk shop has its wares openly
displayed on a busy street. In broad daylight, with a thousand eyes
watching, if they have the skill to steal those silks, then they must be
smart thieves indeed." So he watched carefully to see how they would
manage it.
But what he saw was only the same people walking back and forth in
front of the silk shop. Sometimes they gathered on the left, sometimes
on the right. The official sat watching until after sunset when everyone
had gone and the shop had closed.
"Those fools," said the official to himself, "They were putting one over
on me."
                                                                       31
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
When he returned to his room to order some food, he discovered that
all his belongings were gone.
Yuan Dynasty China
In 1220, Genghis Khan and his general, Subede, were planning the
conquest of the Muslim Empire of Shah Alaed-Din Mohammed.
After crossing the Pamir Mountains, Genghis entered the eastern edges
of the Shah's empire in the Fergana Valley where he split his army into
three divisions. Two divisions continued west to attack Kokan. When
the Shah heard that two Mongol columns were marching towards
Kokan, he rushed all remaining reserves to secure this area.
Meanwhile Genghis' own column quietly turned north and, in a
legendary feat of endurance, crossed 300 miles through the reputedly
impassable Kyzyl Kum Desert. Three months later, they emerged at
Bokhara, deep in the heart of the empire and well behind enemy lines.
With no one to oppose them, Genghis' troops were able to cut the
Shah's communications preventing him from calling in reserves and
supplies from the western provinces. All three armies then converged
on Samarkand.
Mohammed, cut off from his reinforcements, realized the situation was
hopeless and escaped to the south with his remaining troops. He lived
as a fugitive being hunted by the Mongol forces from town to town
until he died one year later.
Summary
Where the enemy expects you to attack, he will reinforce. When he
does so, a part of his army is thus neutralized, defending nothing. Then,
with your full strength, attack his remaining forces.
32
                                          Create Something from Nothing
                     Wú Zhōng Shēng Yǒu
                               Strategy 7
              Create Something from Nothing
     Turning back is how the Way moves; weakness is the means
     the Way employs. The myriad things in the world are born
     from Something, and Something from Nothing.
     Lao Zi, Tao Te Ching
Use the same feint twice. Having reacted to the first and often the
second feint as well, the enemy will be hesitant to react to a third feint.
Therefore, the third feint is the actual attack catching your enemy with
his guard down.
Six Dynasties Period China
General He Ruodun of the Northern Zhou led his troops across the
Yangtze to attack the state of Chen. General Hou Qi of Chen was sent
forth to stop the Zhou invasion. Both armies set up fortified camps
along opposite sides of the river.
                                                                        33
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Shortly after arriving on the scene, heavy rains caused flooding which
cut off the supply lines of the invading Zhou army. Their troops were
forced to scavenge for supplies while the Chen troops had supplies
ferried along the river in small river craft.
General He knew that without supplies his army would be forced to
retreat, so he sought to likewise cut the Chen supply lines.
First he had several boats built to resemble the local style and late at
night ferried them to the Chen encampment. Inside the boats were
hidden heavily armed shock troops. When the Chen troops waded out
to receive what they believed to be their supply boats, they were taken
by surprise. The shock troops inflicted heavy casualties and captured
several Chen soldiers to be brought back for interrogation. From these
captured troops General He learned that several of his own troops had
deserted by riding down river until they were picked up by the Chen
patrol boats.
To prevent further desertions, General He had some horses brought
onto his boats and then whipped. After this was repeated several times
the horses became deathly afraid of boats and would rear and kick
whenever one came close.
He then sent a light division down river to set up an ambush. Several
soldiers were given the boat-shy horses and told to ride along the river
and pretend to defect to the Chen side. When the Chen river patrol saw
the potential deserters, they brought the boats to the shore to pick up
the new recruits. But when the horses were being loaded on board, they
reared and kicked. Distracted by the commotion, the Chen troops were
surprised and killed by the Zhou troops waiting in ambush.
Thereafter, anytime a boat came down river, the Chen forces would
chase it away, fearing another ambush. And anytime they saw troops
willing to desert, they would refuse, fearing another trap.
Sui Dynasty China
In 587 the first Sui emperor, Wendi, launched an attack on the state of
Chen. He sent one of his generals, He Nuobi, to encamp on the north
side of the Yangtze River (which marked the boundary between the two
34
                                          Create Something from Nothing
kingdoms) opposite the enemy's capital. Now every general knows that
to be attacked while crossing a river is disastrous, so both camps waited
for the other to make the first move.
Each day He Nuobi ordered his troops to practice manoeuvres and
create a great deal of noise as though preparing for battle, but he did not
cross the river.
The first time this happened, the Chen commanders were certain that
the invasion had begun and they ordered their men to form defensive
positions. But by sunset still no attack had come. Day after day this
continued until finally the Chen general said, “That old fool is only
playing games with us. We will pay no further attention to his antics."
Meanwhile, General He Nuobi secretly bought or confiscated as many
river boats as he could get hold of and had them hidden. Then he found
a few dozen old hulks and used them to patrol the river. When the Chen
patrols saw these wrecks they believed that the Sui army had, in any
event, no usable boats with which to cross. By this time the Chen
patrols ceased being on the alert.
Having lowered the enemy's guard, General He Nuobi readied his
hidden armada and prepared his men for battle.
As a final precaution just before he launched his attack, he sent a group
of soldiers disguised as hunters across the river to create a commotion
by riding through the underbrush. The Chen troops were distracted by
the sounds of the hunting party and failed to notice the Sui army
crossing the river.
The Chen forces were taken by surprise and all were put to the sword
but one, who was allowed to escape to bring the news back to the
capital. When the lone survivor gave his report, the king of Chen
ordered his remaining troops to immediately set out for the border.
He Nuobi had anticipated this move and had prepared an ambush that
succeeded in wiping out the remaining Chen forces. When the Sui army
arrived at the Chen capital, the king had no troops left with which to
defend the city. The king was taken prisoner, and the state of Chen
became a province of the Sui Empire.
                                                                         35
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Tang Dynasty China
During the An Lushan rebellion in A.D. 756 the Tang general Zhang
Xun was under siege by the forces of General Linghu Chao.
Outnumbered twenty to one, the defending Tang forces soon ran out of
arrows. To remedy this General Zhang ordered his men to make straw
dummies and dress them in black uniforms.
That night the dummies were lowered over the city walls by ropes,
accompanied by the beat of war drums and gongs. General Linghu
thought the enemy was launching a surprise night offensive and
ordered his archers to shower the figures descending the walls with
arrows. Once the dummies where riddled with arrows the Tang soldiers
pulled them back up over the walls, thus restoring their supply of
arrows.
The next day General Linghu, feeling humiliated, attacked the walls in
revenge. That night the Tang again lowered the dummies but General
Linghu ordered his men to ignore them believing it was the same trick
to get more arrows.
When General Zhang saw that no one was firing at the straw dummies,
he ordered five hundred of his best troops to be lowered instead. They
made a lightning raid on the encamped soldiers, catching them
completely by surprise. The siege was lifted and General Linghu's army
fled the field.
Summary
Sun Zi wrote that the direct attack and the indirect attack are
interchangeable depending on the enemy's expectation. Here a feint
(Nothing) becomes the direct attack (Something) which, due to the
enemy's assumptions, is in fact an indirect attack. This is what is meant
by being interchangeable.
36
              Openly Repair the Walkway, Secretly March to Chencang
          Míng Xiū Zhàn Dào, Àn Dù Chéncāng
                              Strategy 8
                 Openly Repair the Walkway,
                 Secretly March to Chencang
     To win victory in battle, the leader must know how to use
     both direct and indirect methods. The interplay between
     direct and indirect methods generates countless tactics.
     Sun Zi, The Art of War
Attack the enemy with two convergent forces. The first is the direct
attack, one that is obvious and for which the enemy prepares his
defence.
The second is the indirect attack, the attack sinister, that the enemy
does not expect and which causes him to divide his forces at the last
minute, leading to confusion and disaster.
                                                                    37
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Warring States Period China
In 270 B.C. the town of Ouyu, bordering the kingdom of Zhao, was
besieged by Qin. The king of Zhao consulted his advisors, most of
whom recommended against marching to save Ouyu, citing that the
terrain was too rugged and difficult to cross. Only Zhao She suggested
an attack regardless of the terrain.
He said, "Qin is unsure whether we will attack since Ouyu is on the far
border of our territory with difficult terrain between us. If I suddenly
showed up, it would be like two rats in a hole - the most spirited fighter
will win."
The king approved and Zhao She left the capital at the head of the relief
forces. However, he had marched only thirty li when he halted the army
and began constructing a fortified encampment. For twenty-eight days
Zhao She continued to dig trenches and erect stockades.
During this time he sent out spies to patrol the countryside. They soon
reported seeing a scouting party of Qin troops spying on the
encampment. Zhao She ordered that these spies were to be allowed to
escape and report back to Qin, and that he be notified the minute they
departed.
When the Qin spies reported back that Zhao was constructing a
fortified camp the Qin general was relieved, since it meant that they
were not going to relieve the siege. He reasoned that since Ouyu was
not inside Zhao territory they were not really concerned about it. The
Qin general therefore failed to prepare defences to his rear
concentrating all his forces instead on taking the town.
Unknown to the Qin general, Zhao She had broken camp the same day
the spies departed and had followed closely behind them arriving on the
scene only hours later. The Qin general having relaxed his guard was
totally shocked by the sudden appearance of the Zhao forces setting up
positions on the favorable North Hill.
Caught between the Zhao forces to their rear and the Ouyu garrison in
the front, the Qin suffered a serious defeat and were forced to flee
across the border.
38
               Openly Repair the Walkway, Secretly March to Chencang
Qin Dynasty China
Toward the end of the Qin dynasty there were numerous rebellions as
the old kingdoms broke away from central imperial rule. The most
powerful of the rebel leaders was Xiang Yu, warlord of western Chu.
He proclaimed that any rebel general that succeeded in capturing the
Qin capital would be granted the territory of Qin as reward. But when
the capital was captured by a mere peasant rebel named Gaozu, 6 Xiang
Yu was not pleased since he had fully expected to capture the capital
himself.
Gaozu, however, wisely refused the honour and was given instead the
governorship of the remote province of Han. This in effect exiled
Gaozu and spared Xiang Yu both the embarrassment and threat of his
presence at court.
The shortest path to reach Han was through a precipitous valley where
part of the road consisted of a wooden walkway that ran along the steep
cliff walls and which was supported by beams inserted into deep holes
carved into the solid rock.
Gaozu's advisor, Jiang Liang concerned that Xiang Yu might think
them too much of a threat to allow them to escape said, "Would it not
be wise to burn and destroy the wooden roadway which you have
passed over? This would prove to the world that you have no intention
of marching east' again and thus set Xiang Yu's mind at ease."
Gaozu agreed and the army burned the walkway as they passed.
6 In Chinese written history emperors are known by several names depending
on what point in their career the story takes place. In this instance, the founder
of the Han Dynasty is called Liu Qi while he was a peasant, the Duke of Bei
when he became a general, the King of Han when he was assigned the
kingdom of that name, Liu Bang when he became emperor (although, the use
of this name was forbidden during his lifetime and so does not appear in the
contemporary histories ) and finally his posthumous title Gaozu. To avoid
unnecessary confusion, I have used the posthumous title, Goazu, throughout
this current work.
                                                                                39
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
However, after a month of preparation, Gaozu was ready to march east
and fight Xiang Yu for control of the empire. First he ordered a large
work detail to begin repairing the wooden walkway while secretly
sending his main force along narrow mountain trails through Chencang.
When news that they were repairing the walkway reached Xiang Yu, he
ordered the king of Yang, Chang Han, to lead an army and position
themselves at the terminus of the walkway. There they could bottle
Gaozu's forces in a narrow valley leaving them with no chance of
breaking out. This was the obvious strategy for such a situation and
Gaozu had counted on whoever was sent to oppose him to use it.
Meanwhile Gaozu's general Han Xin, who had set out weeks earlier,
came out of the mountains well behind Chang's troops waiting at the
valley entrance. They launched a surprise attack from the rear while
Gaozu and his troops charged out of the valley from the front.
Chang was defeated but managed to escape to the capital with the
news.
Xiang Yu sent out three armies to attack Gaozu chasing him all the way
to Zhongyang where Gaozu and the remnants of the Han army were
trapped. Gaozu would triumph in the end but not until after he
employed the strategy Shed Your Skin Like the Golden Cicada (see
Chapter 21)
Muromachi Period Japan
In 1560 one of Japan's greatest warlords, Oda Nobunaga, then still a
minor commander, marched his force of two thousand men to stop the
incursion of a rival warlord, Imagawa Yoshimoto.
Even though Nobunaga was outnumbered twelve to one he set out
humming a tune. Nobunaga's scouts reported that Imagawa was resting
his troops at a village that was nestled near a narrow gorge that
Nobunaga knew would be ideal for a surprise attack. The scouts further
reported that Imagawa's troops were celebrating and viewing the heads
taken in a previous battle.
40
               Openly Repair the Walkway, Secretly March to Chencang
Nobunaga devised the following ploy. He made camp some distance
away from the village. He placed numerous flags and had straw
dummies made to give the impression that a large host had arrived.
Imagawa's forces thus expected an attack to come from the direction of
the enemy camp.
Meanwhile, Nobunaga's troops secretly made a forced march in a wide
circle in order to come up from behind the Imagawa encampment.
Weather favoured Nobunaga's scheme, for late in the day there was a
heavy downpour. Taking advantage of the foul weather, Nobunaga's
troops launched a sudden attack from the rear. So unexpected was this
attack that lmagawa first thought that a brawl had broken out among his
own troops. Only when he saw two enemy samurai charging towards
him did he realize he was under attack.
This realization came too late, and lmagawa was beheaded and his
troops scattered. The battle lasted only a few minutes, but it made Oda
Nobunaga's reputation and he quickly rose to power, eventually
becoming one of Japan's greatest warlords.
Summary
Against a seasoned and wary opponent, feints will prove ineffective.
Instead one must make an actual attack to gain his attention. Once his
forces are concentrated in defending the obvious attack, you attack
from a second direction, thus catching him by surprise.
                                                                     41
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
42
                                  Observe the Fire on the Opposite Shore
                          Gé Àn Guān Huǒ
                               Strategy 9
          Observe the Fire on the Opposite Shore
     To remain disciplined and calm while waiting for disorder to
     appear amongst the enemy is the art of self-possession.
     Sun Zi, The Art of War
Delay entering the field of battle until all the other players have become
exhausted fighting amongst themselves. Then go in full strength and
pick up the pieces.
Chinese Folktale
One day a clam exposed on the river bank opened its shell to take in the
sun. A snipe came over to peck at the exposed flesh of the clam, which
quickly closed its shell to clamp the bird's beak.
"If no rain comes in the next two days, there will be a dead clam," said
the snipe.
                                                                        43
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
"If you don't get your beak free in the next two days, there will be a
dead snipe," replied the clam.
Then along came a fisherman who easily caught them both.
Warring States Period China
Wei was at war with Han who called upon Qi for help. The marquis of
Qi summoned his ministers and asked them, "Would it be better for us
to go to Han's relief immediately or should we wait?"
Some advised an immediate expedition before Han was conquered but
one advisor disagreed. "Have you not heard that when two tigers fight
one will be killed and the other crippled?
Neither the troops of Han nor Wei are yet exhausted and were we to go
to Han's rescue we would simply be a substitute victim for Wei's armies
and our forces would soon be taking orders from Han.
At present Wei is intent on having Han, and when Han is about to
perish she will surely send another plea for help. We should therefore
make a secret treaty with Han offering our support but delay sending
any aid until Wei is seriously weakened."
The marquis agreed and gave the envoys secret assurances that he
would join their side and sent them back to Han. Believing that Qi was
wholly behind them, Han fought five battles and lost each one. Only
when Han was about to fall did Qi send in her troops who crushed the
weakened Wei forces at Maling.
With Wei and Han now both near collapse the marquis of Qi forced
both to submit to his sovereignty and become vassals of Qi.
Three Kingdoms Period China
In the early years of the Three Kingdoms Period the warlord Cao Cao
had defeated and killed his rival Yuan Shao in the battle of Guandu.
44
                                 Observe the Fire on the Opposite Shore
After his death, Yuan's three sons began fighting over the succession.
Cao Cao decided to launch another attack, but as soon as he began to
mobilize his troops the sons united their forces against him.
Then one of his ministers, Guo Jian, said, "When we attacked we
provided the three sons a common enemy to unite them. Let us bide our
time and allow them to resume fighting amongst themselves. After they
have weakened themselves we can attack again."
Cao Cao withdrew his army and soon the Yuan brothers renewed their
squabbling. The elder brother was angry because his father had named
his middle brother as successor. The youngest brother supported the
middle brother. Eventually the two younger brothers won out and the
eldest brother was killed.
During this time Cao Cao had started attacking outlying provinces. By
the time the eldest brother was killed, the two remaining brothers
feared engaging Cao Cao and instead fled to a distant province in the
northeast to seek the aid of a nomadic chief named Gongsun Gang.
Some ministers urged Cao Cao to pursue the brothers before they could
elicit the help of the barbarians, but Cao Cao ordered his troops to
withdraw and assured his minister that Gongsun would soon send him
the heads of the two brothers.
Shortly thereafter a courier brought the two heads neatly wrapped and
boxed. When asked by the confounded ministers for an explanation
Cao Cao told them, "If I had attacked the brothers, Gongsun would
assume that he would be next to fall under my dominion and his logical
choice would be to unite with the brothers against me.
But if I provided no threat to Gongsun then the success of the two
brothers would be his next immediate threat. Since I did not present the
threat, Gongsun was able to eliminate his next possible threat then and
there."
Hojo Regency Japan
In 1583 the great general Toyotomi Hideyoshi was positioning his
forces against Akechi Mitsuhide in what would be the battle of
                                                                      45
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Yamazaki. Shortly after the battle had engaged, Tsetsui Junkeian, an
ally of Mitsuhide, arrived on the scene. Impressed by the superior
forces of Hideyoshi, he refused to attack but instead ordered his men to
line up in battle formation on a hill above the Horagatoge pass where
he could watch the battle before deciding which general to side with.
Seeing Hideyoshi gaining the advantage he betrayed his ally and sent
his troops over to Hideyoshi's side.
This incident was never forgotten and henceforth the Japanese
equivalent of Observe the Fire on the Opposite Shore is known as "to
wait at Horagatoge."
Summary
When there are several players each competing with the other to attain
the same goal, restrain yourself from being drawn into the fray. While
it may seem opportunity is slipping past, wait and watch. Either the
goal will reveal itself as not worth fighting for, or you can attain it later
with far less effort.
46
                                         Hide Your Dagger Behind a Smile
                           Xiào Lǐ Cáng Dāo
                                 Strategy 10
              Hide Your Dagger Behind A Smile
      Speak deferentially, listen respectfully, follow his commands,
      and accord with him in everything. He will never imagine you
      might be in conflict with him. Our treacherous measures will
      then be settled.
      The Six Secret Teachings of the Tai Gong
Charm and ingratiate yourself to your enemy. When you have gained
his trust, you move against him in secret. 7
7 Another Chinese proverb that refers to the same strategy is known as: Ho
Lian, Hei Xin, “Thick face, black heart”.The ‘Thick face’ refers to ones ability
to hide your innermost schemes behind the façade of benign innocence., the
‘Black heart’ is one’s true intentions.
                                                                             47
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Warring States Period China
The king of Wei sent a beautiful courtesan to the king of Chu who took
great delight in the new girl. His queen, Zheng Xiu, knowing how fond
the king was of his new woman, treated the newcomer as a sister
supplying her with gifts and treasures and whatever she needed.
The king, hearing of this, summoned his queen and said, "A woman
serves a man with her beauty and thus jealousy is a part of her very
nature. Yet you, knowing how much I am pleased by the new woman,
have treated her more kindly than I have myself. These actions are
those of a child to her parents or a minister to his ruler. How
unexpected it is to find this in a queen to her husband."
The queen thus knew that her husband did not suspect her of jealousy.
When she next met with the new girl the queen told her, "His majesty is
much taken with your beauty but he dislikes the shape of your nose.
When next you serve him be sure to cover it with your hand."
Grateful for the advice, when she next served the king this is what she
did.
The next day the king asked his queen, ''The new woman covers her
nose when she is with me. Do you know why?"
"I know," replied the queen.
"Well then no matter how unpleasant, you must tell me the reason."
"It seems she does not like the way your majesty smells."
"The shrew!" cried the king.
In a rage the king ordered that the unfortunate girl's nose be cut of
Warring States Period China
In 342 B.C. General Yang of Qin invaded the state of Wei and laid
siege to the city of Wu. The king of Wei, already weakened from a
48
                                       Hide Your Dagger Behind a Smile
previous battle, was unwilling to face another engagement and asked
his counselors for advice.
One of his officials, minister Ying, said, "General Yang was originally
a native of Wei and in our youth he and I were close friends. I therefore
request to be allowed to go personally to appeal to our friendship and
try to persuade him into lifting the siege." The king agreed and sent the
minister to Wu.
When he arrived, minister Ying sent a message asking for a meeting
outside the city walls in three days to discuss a mutual retreat. When
general Yang received the message that his old friend was in charge of
the city's defense and was requesting peace negotiations he readily
agreed.
Three days later minister Ying left the city and, to show his good faith,
was accompanied by only three hundred men. General Yang greeted his
old friend with open arms and invited him and his men to a banquet.
During the celebrations, minister Ying and his men were seized and
their uniforms taken. Dressed like Wei soldiers, the men of Qin
marched back to the city and ordered the gates opened. As soon as the
gates were open they rushed in and seized the city.
The trusting minister Ying was taken back to Qin as captive.
Yuan Dynasty China
In 1320, after the death of emperor Renzong (the great-grandson of
Kubalai Khan), there followed two years of turmoil in the court over
who should succeed to the throne. One faction installed the nine-year-
old son of the late emperor, but the new prime minister, seeing an
opportunity to advance his status, conspired to have the young emperor
and his supporters massacred.
He then sent for Prince Huai, who had been banished to the south years
earlier, and installed him on the throne in hopes of manipulating the
inexperienced ruler. Prince Huai, however, wanted to make his elder
brother Heshi emperor.
                                                                       49
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
When Prince Heshi received the message that his brother had become
emperor and wanted to hand the throne to him, he became suspicious
and refused to go to the capital. 8 In order to assuage his elder brother's
fears, the young emperor offered to meet him halfway.
Prince Heshi agreed and set out along the road to the capital. When the
two brothers met along the road they rushed to clasp each other's arms
with tears in their eyes.
For three days they feasted and drank well into the night. On the
morning of the fourth day the elder brother, Heshi, emerged alone from
his brother's tent. The body of the emperor was discovered minutes
later and Heshi became the new emperor.
 No one ever mentioned the late emperor or his sudden death again.
Summary
In any contest where the stakes are high, kindness and goodwill are
quickly discarded. To hide sinister intentions behind the facade of
friendship and loyalty is standard practice in the upper echelons of
power. Given the history of imperial intrigues, such an offer could not
do anything but arouse suspicion.
8 Given the history of imperial intrigues, such and offer could not do anything
but arouse suspicion.
50
                           Sacrifice the Plum Tree in Place of the Peach
                         Lǐ Dài Táo Jiāng
                            Strategy 11
       Sacrifice the Plum Tree in Place of the Peach
      Know contentment, and you will suffer no disgrace. Know
      when to stop, and you will meet with no danger. You can then
      endure.
      Lao Zi, The Tao Te Ching
There are circumstances in which you must sacrifice short term
objectives in order to gain the long term goal. This is the scapegoat
strategy whereby someone else suffers the consequences so that the rest
do not.
Warring States Period China
Sun Zi's worthiest opponent was Fan Li, a general of the state of Yue.
Against Sun Zi's advice, King Helu of Wu took the army personally to
attack Yue. Fan Li, though outnumbered, was confident of winning,
since the king's military abilities were not in the same league as Sun
Zi's.
                                                                      51
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Fan Li prepared a shock tactic by scouring the kingdom's dungeons and
prisons for condemned criminals. He offered the convicts a last chance
to earn honor in this world and provide benefits for their families. Since
they were to die anyway, if they sacrificed their lives on the battlefield
instead, then their names would be restored to honor and their families
richly rewarded. With nothing to lose, the convicts agreed.
When the two armies met and were arranged into battle formations Fan
Li gave the signal for the convicts to play their part. Dressed in Yue
uniforms they marched to the front of the lines, drew their swords, and,
before the horrified Wu army, cut their own throats before dropping
dead to the ground.
Taking advantage of the shock and demoralization of the Wu army, Fan
Li quickly sent a readied detachment to attack Wu's flanks and in the
resulting confusion defeated the Wu army.
Warring States Period China
While in residence at the Qi court, Lord Meng Zhang sent his retainer
Feng Xuan to collect the taxes from his little fief in Xue.
Before he left, Feng asked Lord Meng, "Is there anything I may buy for
you when I return?"
"If you see something my house lacks, buy it." replied the lord.
Feng Xuan went to Xue and sent out officers to summon the people to
settle their debts. When he had collected all the tallies Feng feigned that
he had received an order from Lord Meng absolving all outstanding
debts. He returned all the money, burned the tallies, and returned to Qi.
The next day Feng called on Lord Meng who was surprised to see him
return so soon. "Why do you return so speedily? Have the debts been
collected?" asked Lord Meng.
"They have already been collected," was the reply.
"What did you purchase on your return?"
52
                            Sacrifice the Plum Tree in Place of the Peach
"My Lord asked me to see if there was anything your house lacked. It
was my humble opinion that your castle was filled with precious
objects, that your stables abounded with steeds, and the lower palaces
with beauties. It seemed that only one thing was lacking, and that was
fealty. This I bought my Lord."
"How can one buy fealty?" asked Lord Meng.
"At the moment you hold the little fief of Xue, yet you do not cherish the
people there as your own children, but look on them as a source of
profit," replied Feng.
"Your servant took it upon himself to feign an order from you relieving
the people of their debts and they cheered your name. That is how your
servant purchased fealty."
Lord Meng was displeased but said, "So be it! You may now rest, sir."
A year later the old king of Qi died and the new king distrusted all of
his predecessor's advisors. Lord Meng was informed he was being
relieved of his duties and sent back to govern his own fief. Lord Meng
and his entourage set out to return to Xue, but when they were still a
hundred li from the city, all its people, even the elderly and children,
came out midway to welcome their lord in joyous celebration.
Lord Meng turned to Feng and said, "Your purchase of fealty on my
behalf, sir, is apparent to me today."
"My lord," replied Feng, "even the wiliest rabbit needs more than one
bolt hole to escape to in order to survive."
Three Kingdoms Period China
On one of his campaigns Cao Cao was running short of food. He asked
his supply sergeant what he could do. The sergeant suggested reducing
the rations by secretly using a smaller cup to parcel out the rice.
Cao Cao praised the sergeant and gave his consent to use the smaller
measuring cup. After a few days, the soldiers began to complain and
                                                                        53
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
accused their commander of cheating them. Cao Cao again called in the
supply sergeant and told him the situation.
"I will do anything I can to help, but what would you have me do?''
asked the sergeant.
"I'm afraid I am going to have to borrow your head," replied Cao Cao
and he had the sergeant decapitated and his head stuck on a tall pole
with a banner that read "Caught cheating on supplies by using a
smaller measuring cup."
Summary
In order to gain one thing it is often necessary to lose another. Trying to
hold on to everything at once may cause you in the end to lose
everything. Instead, sacrifice smaller concerns to strengthen your more
important endeavor.
54
                           Seize the Opportunity to Lead a Sheep Away
                     Shùn Shǒu Qiān Yáng
                             Strategy 12
      Seize the Opportunity to Lead a Sheep Away
     While following the rules of strategy and tactics be prepared
     to take advantage of circumstances not covered by
     conventional thinking. If opportunities present themselves,
     then the leader should be flexible in his plans and adapt to
     the new circumstances.
     Sun Zi, The Art of War
While carrying out your plans be flexible enough to take advantage of
any opportunity that presents itself, however small, and avail yourself
of any profit, however slight.
Spring And Autumn Period China
In 770 B.C. The duke of Chen joined forces with Liu and Qi and
together they attacked Song. Since the main body of the Chen army
was on campaign, the duke of Song used the strategy Attack Wei to
Rescue Zhao and attacked the now poorly defended state of Chen. This
                                                                    55
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
caused the duke of Chen to break off his invasion of Song and return to
rescue his own capital.
When the duke of Song heard that the Chen army was returning, he
withdrew his army. As the Song army retreated they passed through the
small kingdom of Tai who had remained neutral during the war
between Chen and Song. An advisor to the duke of Song suggested that
since the king of Tai had refused to ally himself against Chen, why not
lay siege to the city and take their territory since they were already
there.
The duke agreed and he ordered his troops to surround the capital of
Tai. The king of Tai was outnumbered so he sent a secret message to
the duke of Chen asking for reinforcements. A couple of days later the
Song scouts reported that the Chen army was approaching. Once again
the duke of Song abandoned the field and fled back to his home
territory.
The siege lifted, the king of Tai threw open the gates and welcomed his
new allies into the city. The duke of Chen, finding himself and his
troops inside the walls of a foreign city saw an opportunity that occurs
but seldom. He seized the king and made him prisoner while his troops
quickly overcame the unsuspecting Tai guards and took control of the
city.
Duke Chen, with scarcely any fighting, was able to annex another
kingdom to his rule.
Qin Dynasty China
In 209 B.C. China revolted against years of oppressive Qin rule. The
Qin general, Chang Han, was sent out to put down the rebellion. He
defeated the forces of Chu and then crossed the Yellow River to lay
siege to the city of Chulu in Zhao.
The King of Chu gathered his remaining divisions and placed them
under the command of General Song Yi. As second in command he
appointed the aristocrat general Xiang Yu and sent them to lead the
army to rescue Zhao.
56
                             Seize the Opportunity to Lead a Sheep Away
Song Yi marched the army out but stopped half-way and made camp,
where they sat and waited for forty-six days.
Xiang Yu was becoming impatient and went to see Song Yi and said,
"News has come that the Qin army has besieged the king of Zhao at
Chulu.
If we lead our troops across the Yellow River at once, we can attack
them with our forces from the outside, Zhao will respond by attacking
from the city, and we are sure to defeat the Qin army."
"Not so," replied Song Yi. "He who merely slaps at the gadfly on the
cow's back will never succeed in killing the pesky lice. Qin is attacking
Zhao. If she is victorious in battle, then her troops will be exhausted
and we can take advantage of her weakness. If she fails, then victory
has already been assured.
Therefore it is better to let Qin and Zhao fight it out. You see, when it
comes to fighting with a sword, I may not be a match for you, but when
it comes to laying out strategy, you are no match for me!"
After this meeting there was no love lost between the two generals and
Song Yi secretly let it be known that he would reward anyone who
assassinated Xiang Yu.
Shortly afterwards Song Yi received orders from the king of Chu to
send his son back to Qi to become prime minister. Delighted by his
son's promotion, Song Yi and the entire army escorted him back to the
capital marching for a whole day until arriving at Wuyan city.
That night, and well into the next day, Song Yi and his son celebrated
at a drinking party in the comfort of the city while the remainder of the
army bivouacked outside. The day was cold and a heavy rain was
falling so that the soldiers were chilled and starving.
Xiang Yu had had enough and declared before the senior officers, "We
joined forces for the purpose of attacking Qin, but instead we have sat
here all this time without advancing.
                                                                       57
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
The year is lean, the people poor, and our men eat nothing but taro
root and pulse. We have no provisions for our army, and yet Song Yi
holds a great drinking party.
He will not lead us across the river so that we may live off the food of
Zhao and attack Qin. Now if Qin should succeed in defeating the newly
formed Zhao she will be stronger than before, then what sort of
weakness will there be that we can take advantage of?
Our troops suffered only a single defeat, yet we are all brought
together under Song Yi's sole command so that the entire safety of our
state depends on this one move.
Song Yi takes no thought for our soldiers, but attends only to his
personal affairs. He is a traitor to the altars of our soil!"
Early the next morning Xiang Yu went to make his daily report to the
supreme general. When he entered the tent, he quickly drew his sword
and cut off Song Yi's head.
Then he went outside and announced, "Song Yi was plotting with Qin
against Chu. The king of Chu secretly sent me an order to execute
him."
All the other commanders submitted to him in fear. Xiang Yu became
Supreme General and marched his army across the river, and in nine
battles defeated the Qin forces.
Xiang Yu went on to conquer more than half of the empire before
losing to Gaozu, the founder of the Han dynasty.
Yuan Dynasty China
During the final days of the Yuan dynasty, rebellion had broken out
throughout the empire. Initially there were several contenders vying to
be the first to found a new dynasty on the imminent fall of the house of
Yuan, but the field was narrowed to two: Chu Yuanchang and Chen
Yifu. The two armies met at Poyang Lake where a naval engagement
was to take place.
58
                            Seize the Opportunity to Lead a Sheep Away
General Chen had the advantage of both troops and ships. His ships
were large and sturdy and he had them lined up side by side across the
entire expanse of the lake. He furthermore had the ships joined together
with iron chains so as to create an impenetrable barrier.
General Chu sent his ships to attack but they were defeated, having
failed to break through the cordon. Fortunately for Chu, the next day a
violent northwest gale began to blow. Since Chen's flotilla was situated
downwind, Chu took advantage of the situation to launch fireboats
against the barrier.
Soon Chen's troops were in a frenzy to save their ships from both the
rising storm and the fire which was fanned into a blazing fierceness by
the wind.
Taking advantage of the panic and confusion that ensued, Chu launched
his own fleet into the attack and they completely defeated Chen's
forces.
General Chen was killed by an arrow through his eye while general
Chu became the founder of the Ming dynasty.
Summary
Even the wisest planner cannot calculate certainty into his schemes.
The element of chance is ever present and a watchful eye is needed to
spot when the door of opportunity is opening.
                                                                      59
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
60
                                        Beat the Grass to Startle the Snake
                           Dá Cǎo Jīng Shé
                               Strategy 13
              Beat the Grass to Startle the Snake
      Agitate him and ascertain the pattern of his movements.
      Determine his disposition and so ascertain the field of battle.
      Probe him and learn where his strength is abundant and
      where deficient.
      Sun Zi, The Art of War
      When no matter what you do you are unable to determine the
      enemy's situation, pretend that you are going to attack
      fiercely, and you will learn the enemy's plan. When you know
      the enemy's plan, it will be easy to gain victory.
      Miyamoto Musashi, The Book of Five Rings
When you cannot detect the opponent's plans launch a direct, but brief,
attack and observe your opponent's reactions. His behaviour will reveal
his strategy.
                                                                         61
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Song Dynasty China
One day, in the county of Jianzhou, there was a man who lost a
precious object. The local magistrate, Chen Shuku, was called in to
investigate. He questioned several people, but no one could tell him
who the thief was. So, Magistrate Chen laid a trap for those he
suspected.
"I know of a temple," he told them, "whose bell has great spiritual
power that can tell a thief from an honest man. Since my investigation
is at a standstill we must employ the supernatural powers of the bell to
solve the matter."
The magistrate had the bell brought to the courthouse and displayed in
the rear chamber. Then he had the suspects brought in to testify to their
guilt or innocence. He explained to them that if an innocent man
touched the bell it would remain silent, but if a guilty man touched the
bell it would ring out. After lighting incense and chanting prayers, the
magistrate had curtains erected around the bell.
Previously he had instructed one of his assistants to secretly smear ink
on the bell after the curtains were closed. Each suspect was then told to
place his hand through the curtain and touch the bell. As they withdrew
their hands Chen would examine them. Everyone's hands were stained
except those of one man, who confessed to the theft. He did not touch
the bell for fear it would ring.
Qin Dynasty
The notorious eunuch Zhao Gao is credited with helping to bring down
the house of Qin, ending China's first and shortest imperial dynasty.
After the first emperor died, Zhao Gao conspired with the chief
minister Li Si to dispose of the legitimate heir to the throne and install a
weak and corrupt puppet emperor, Huhei (see Chapter 14).
Having established his influence over the young emperor, Zhao Gao
was nervous about possible opposition from the other ministers of state.
So he devised a test to see which ones would be faithful to him. One
day he brought a stag into the court and presented it to the emperor
explaining that it was a horse.
62
                                        Beat the Grass to Startle the Snake
 "You're mistaken, Prime Minister," said the emperor." You've called a
stag a horse."
Zhao Gao turned to the other ministers present and asked them whether
it was a horse or a stag. Some kept silent. Others, in an attempt to
ingratiate themselves with the true power behind the throne, agreed it
was a horse. And still others said it was a stag. The emperor was under
Zhao Gao's control to such a degree that he believed he was going
insane and that the stag really was a horse.
Meanwhile, one of Zhao Gao's spies was recording the answers given
by each of the ministers. Afterwards, Zhao Gao secretly framed charges
against all those who had said it was a stag and had them executed.
Momoyama Period Japan
After almost two centuries of civil war Japan was brought under the
military control of one man, Toyotomi Hideyoshi, but he died eight
years later leaving a five year-old heir.
The Daimyo who had served under Hideyoshi split into two camps:
those who supported the heir led by Ishida Mitsunari, and those who
secretly supported Tokugawa leyasu. For two years tensions between
the two camps increased as the remaining Daimyo9 chose which side to
support in the inevitable showdown.
In 1600 the two camps met near the small village of Sekigahara and
fought what has come to be known as the last great samurai battle.
Those supporting Ishida and the heir apparent numbered eighty
thousand, while the Tokugawa army numbered seventy-five thousand.
The two armies formed battle lines among the rolling hills with neither
side having the advantage of terrain.
However, positioned on some hills overlooking the flanks of both
armies were troops led by Kobayakawa Hideaki, an ally of Ishida.
Hideaki's position was a serious threat to the Tokugawa left flank. Yet
when the battle began, the Tokugawa forces did not attack them, nor
9 The rough equivalent of a fuedal baron or warlord.
                                                                         63
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
did Hideaki charge down on the Tokugawa. As the battle raged on
neither side appeared to be gaining the upper hand so Ishida signalled
Hideaki to make his attack, but no attack came. Ishida then signalled
frantically and sent messengers urging Hideaki to attack but he still
refused to move.
Tokugawa was also concerned about Hideaki's refusal to enter the fray
since he had secretly agreed to betray Ishida during the heat of battle. It
became apparent to Tokugawa that Hideaki was going to use the
strategy Waiting at Horagatoge (see Chapter 9) and join in with the
winning team after the battle was won.
Tokugawa ordered a detachment of harquebusiers to charge up the hill
and fire on Hideaki's troops. This forced Hideaki into action since he
could no longer sit passively observing.
He honoured his secret agreement with Tokugawa and charged down
on the flank of his former ally Ishida. Hideaki's defection helped turn
the tide of battle. The Tokugawa forces prevailed and leyasu went on to
become Shogun and found the Tokugawa dynasty.
Summary
A seasoned warrior knows this strategy well and will not reveal his true
intentions. But the inexperienced, nervous of making a mistake in such
a high stakes game, will overreact to feints and will thus reveal their
weakness.
64
                                       Borrow a Corpse to Raise the Spirit
                          Jiè Shī Huán Hún
                               Strategy 14
             Borrow a Corpse to Raise the Spirit
     In the spirit religion there is what is called the mystery of the
     spirits. The mystery is kept secret to foster religious faith.
     When people have faith, they and others benefit from it. In the
     Warriors Way, this is called strategy. Although the strategy is
     falsehood, when the falsehood is used in order to win without
     hurting people, the falsehood becomes true.
     Yagyu Munenori, Family Book On The Art Of War
Take an institution, a technology, or a method that has been forgotten
or discarded and appropriate it for your own purpose. Revive
something from the past by giving it a new purpose or to reinterpret and
bring to life old ideas, customs, and traditions.
Qin Dynasty China
In 212 B.C. the first emperor of China, Qin Shihuangdi, died while
touring his empire. The emperor had always been afraid of death and
                                                                       65
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
was constantly ingesting various "immortal elixirs" provided by a host
of mystic frauds and pretenders. 10 To suggest that the emperor would
one day die implied that he was a fool for taking these potions, which
was tantamount to treason. No one dared mention the possibility of his
mortality to him and as a result, he left no instructions as to who should
succeed him.
There were only two others present when he died: the chief minister Li
Si, and the eunuch Zhao Gao. They plotted to keep his death a secret
until they could decide for themselves whom to place on the throne.
While the emperor's eldest son Fushu was the natural choice, both men
dreaded his accession as it would mean their fall from power. To rid
themselves of this potential threat they sent an order signed with the
name of the emperor demanding that Fushu and his loyal general, Meng
Tian, both commit suicide.
The general suspected a plot and told the prince that he had three
hundred thousand soldiers under his command and that they should
march on the capital and demand an explanation from the emperor.
But Fushu was so deathly afraid of his father, who was infamous for his
harshness and cruelty, that he dared not question the imperial order lest
some punishment even worse than death be visited upon him. Without
further inquiry he committed suicide and his loyal general soon
followed suit.
Fushu's younger brother Huhei, who had been in on the plot to
eliminate his brother, was installed on the throne under the control of Li
Si and Zhao Gao. The young emperor was kept busy in the imperial
harem while the two cronies took control of the government (see
Chapter13).
They were so corrupt and inept that shortly thereafter the entire empire
was in open revolt. Within two years, all three had been executed and
the House of Qin disappeared from history.
10 Many of these potions containes strychnine and mercury and some
historians believe he may have slowly poisoned himself to death.
66
                                      Borrow a Corpse to Raise the Spirit
Han Dynasty China
When the emperor Huidi died in 188 B.C. he left no heir. His mother,
the empress Lu, bought a child several years before his death and had
her daughter-in-law pretend that it was her own. To cover her tracks the
empress had the boy's natural mother executed. After the emperor's
death, the empress had this boy installed on the throne with herself as
regent.
However, within two years the boy, after learning that his true mother
had been executed, was heard to say, "When I become emperor I will
know what to do."
When the empress's spies reported the words spoken by the young
emperor she had him murdered and another puppet set in his place.
The empress ruled a prosperous empire for eight years through the six
successive child emperors that she installed on the throne before dying
of a mysterious illness. Rumor said her death was the result of a curse
from one of her late husband's concubines, who was horribly mutilated
and tortured according to the empress's precise instructions. 11
So horrible was the punishment meted out by the empress that her true
son and heir, when shown the results of her handiwork, went insane,
and died a year later.
Three Kingdoms Period China
During the last stages of the crumbling Han dynasty the country was
split apart by four warlord generals who had rebelled against the throne,
each one seeking to found his own dynasty. The last Han emperor,
Xiandi, was captured while on campaign against one of the four
generals, but he managed to escape with a small entourage and make
his way back to the war-torn capital of Luoyang.
The confused and frightened emperor was planning to hide in a ruined
palace until the trouble blew over, but was discovered by spies working
11 So horrible was the punishment meted out by the empress that her true son,
when shown the results of her handiwork, went insane a died a year later.
                                                                           67
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
for another warlord named Cao Cao, who hurriedly marched his army
to the desolate capital and captured the emperor.
Cao Cao offered the emperor his "protection" which the emperor could
hardly refuse. Thereafter the emperor was kept under close guard and
used only to sign proclamations drawn up by Cao Cao who thereby
claimed to be acting on behalf of the Han Dynasty's true emperor.
For twenty years the emperor was used as a puppet behind which Cao
Cao ruled until the emperor retired and handed over the seals of
government. Cao Cao thereupon founded the short-lived Cao Wei
dynasty.
To prevent any future resurrection of the Han Dynasty, Cao Cao had
the retired emperor and all remaining relatives assassinated, thus
bringing an end to the great Han dynasty.
Heian Period Japan
In the 11th century, the warrior monks known as Yamabushi formed
large monastic communities in the mountains surrounding the capital of
Kyoto.
Over time, their ranks increased and their power grew to the point that
each monastery maintained a private army. From time to time, these
monk armies would march into the capital to demand favors and
concessions from the emperor, who by this time had become merely a
figurehead. Although feared for their fighting prowess with a Naginata,
(A halberd type weapon with a long curved blade at the end of a pole.)
the monks also employed another tactic in the form of psychological
warfare.
They would carry into battle a huge portable shrine, known as a
Mikoshi. Within the shrine it was believed there lived the spirit of one
of the many gods the Yamabushi worshipped. Any offense against the
Mikoshi was considered an offense against the deity itself. During
battle, enemy archers dared not unleash their arrows into the
Yamabushi ranks for fear of striking the Mikoshi and incurring the
wrath of god.
68
                                    Borrow a Corpse to Raise the Spirit
At other times the monks would carry the Mikoshi into the town square,
chant curses on the townsfolk and return to the mountains leaving the
Mikoshi in the village.
The townspeople were loath to go near it believing the town and
everyone in it was cursed by its presence. Only after the townsfolk had
gathered together a suitable "donation" would the monks return and
haul the dreaded shrine away.
Summary
Symbols, myths, institutions, and philosophies have an inherent moral
and emotional power. This power can be appropriated and used to serve
the goals of a higher strategy.
                                                                     69
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
70
                                      Lure the Tiger Down the Mountain
                          Diào Hǔ Lí Shān
                             Strategy 15
             Lure the Tiger Down the Mountain
      With regard to heights, 1j you occupy them before the enemy
      you can wait for the enemy to climb up. But if he has
      occupied them before you, do not follow but retreat and try to
      entice him out.
      Sun Zi, The Art of War
Never directly attack a well-entrenched opponent. Instead lure him
away from his stronghold and separate him from his source of strength.
Three Kingdoms Period China
In the year A.D. 199 Sun Ce had consolidated his newly conquered
territories in the south and his next goal was the prosperous area of
Lujiang to the north. However, Lujiang had a professional army and
was well defended. In addition it also had the advantage of terrain,
being accessible only through a couple of easily defended passes.
                                                                     71
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Sun Ce's advisors cautioned against moving directly against such a
well-entrenched and powerful state so they devised another scheme.
Sun Ce sent an emissary laden with gifts and a letter to the king of
Lujiang, Liu Xun. The letter praised the king's military skills and
begged for his assistance.
Sun Ce wrote, "For years the state of Shangliao has invaded my
territory unhindered and carried away booty, yet we are too weak to
launch a retaliatory raid. If Your Majesty would attack Shangliao we
would give assistance and you could annex the state for yourself."
Flattered and covetous of increasing his domains, the king of Lujiang
disregarded the advice of his counselors and attacked the state of
Shangliao. Several weeks later, while the king of Lujiang was busy
laying siege to Shangliao's capital, Sun Ce attacked the almost
undefended Lujiang and easily seized the capital.
Without the expected support from Sun Ce, The king of Lujiang failed
to take the capital of Shangliao and he returned only to find his own
capital already in enemy hands. Sun Ce now had the advantage of the
Lujiang terrain and the former king could do nothing but flee with his
army.
Han Dynasty China
The first Han emperor, Gaozu, wishing to destroy the growing menace
of the Xiongnu tribes that had been raiding his northern territories, sent
spies to report on their condition. Forewarned, the Xiongnu carefully
concealed their able-bodied men and well-fed horses and allowed only
old men and emaciated cattle to be seen wandering the countryside.
When the spies returned they all recommended an immediate attack on
the Xiongnu since it seemed obvious that they were poor and starving.
However, one of the councillors, Lou Qing, became suspicious saying,
"When two countries go to war they are naturally inclined to make
ostentatious displays of strength. Yet our spies see only old men and
deprivation. This is surely a deception on the enemy's part to lure us
into a trap, and it would be unwise to attack."
72
                                      Lure the Tiger Down the Mountain
 The emperor however disregarded his advice and as predicted they
were trapped in the city of Pingcheng.
The emperor and his army barely escaped after employing an
unorthodox strategy of their own (see Chapter 31)
Yuan Dynasty China
Lure the Tiger Down the Mountain was a favorite strategy for the
Mongol armies since their superior cavalry was better suited to
attacking field troops then laying siege to fortified positions.
A special unit of the Mongol cavalry known as the Mangudai would
charge the enemy's front lines and then, apparently beaten back, they
would feign a disorderly retreat. Deceived into believing that they were
winning, the opposing army would leave their positions and give chase.
Once the pursuers had been drawn out into a long thin line the Mongols
would quickly reorganize into two divisions that would split apart in
opposite directions and circle back to attack the center of the line of
pursuing soldiers.
After destroying the center and separating the enemy's forces they
could easily overcome the remaining forces up and down the line.
Summary
It is a rule in warfare to avoid attacking what is hard. When an
opponent has the advantage of terrain, defensive works, or home
territory, then he is in a position of strength. Through trickery and
deception he must be lured away from his advantageous position. Once
out in the open he will expose weaknesses that can then be attacked.
                                                                      73
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
74
                                    To Catch Something, First Let It Go
                        Yù Qín Gū Zòng
                             Strategy 16
            To Catch Something, First Let It Go
     Do not obstruct an army retreating homeward. If you besiege
     an army you must leave an outlet. Do not press an exhausted
     invader.
     Sun Zi, The Art of War
Cornered prey will often mount a final desperate attack. To prevent this
you let the enemy believe he still has a chance for freedom. His will to
fight is thus dampened by his desire to escape.
When in the end the freedom is proven a falsehood the enemy's morale
will be defeated and he will surrender without a fight.
Spring And Autumn Period China
In 506 B.C. an alliance of states headed by Wu overran and defeated
the army of Chu. The remaining Chu troops were in retreat.
                                                                      75
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
The king of Wu wanted to pursue and destroy the fleeing army but was
held back by his younger brother Fu Gai who said, "A cornered beast
will fight to the finish, how much more an army of warriors. If they
know there's no escape and they must fight to the death, they are bound
to overpower us. However, if we allow them to reach and cross the
river then, once in their home territory, they will think only of escaping
the field."
The king followed his brother's advice and allowed the Chu army to
cross the river. Once on the other side, the Chu soldiers began
preparing food since they had not eaten in a long time. When the Wu
army finally arrived on the opposite shore, the Chu soldiers abandoned
their cooking fires and scattered into the countryside. The Wu army
followed after and easily conquered the Chu capital of Yingdu.
Han Dynasty China
The Han general, Zhao Zhongguo, was sent to conduct a campaign to
drive out a tribe of Xianling barbarians who had invaded the western
provinces.
By the time general arrived in the area the Xianling had been pillaging
for months and were negligent and lax in their guard. They were no
longer in the mood to fight and were intent on making off with their
booty.
When they saw the great Han army approaching from a distance, they
panicked, abandoned their baggage train, and withdrew towards the
Huang River. Their route of retreat was narrow and constricted, so
general Zhao proceeded slowly.
Some of his commanders were eager to close in fast on the retreating
tribesmen, but Zhao said, 'These impoverished invaders cannot be
hastily pursued. If we proceed slowly they will depart without paying
much attention to us; if too quickly, they will turn about and fight to the
death."
His commanders half-heartily agreed.
76
                                     To Catch Something, First Let It Go
The Xianling, seeing in the lax pursuit an opportunity to escape
unharmed, dashed madly into the Huang River to flee. Several hundred
drowned, while the remainder threw down their weapons and scattered
into the countryside.
Thus without engaging in battle or suffering any casualties, General
Zhao succeeded in inflicting heavy casualties and completely routing
the enemy.
Six Dynasties Period China
In A.D. 384 a district administrator named Hong allied himself with the
local tribes and rose up in arms against the emperor of the Former Qin.
The emperor sent General Fu to quell the rebellion. General Fu was
renowned as being a fierce commander who showed no pity for either
the enemy or his own troops. When the rebel Hong heard that general
Fu was leading the army against him he prepared to flee the state.
General Fu drove his soldiers fast in order to intercept Hong and
prevent him from escaping.
One of General Fu's advisors said, "Hong and his tribesman have a
mind to go home. It behoves us to allow them to escape beyond the pass
rather than obstruct them."
But General Fu did not agree with this advice and urged his men on
even faster. He finally caught up to Hong and his tribesmen at the Hua
Marsh. There Hong and his men were on desperate ground and turned
to fight.
Because of the entangling terrain, General Fu could not make effective
use of his superior numbers, while Hong's tribesmen were determined
to fight to the death. The result was that the Qin forces suffered an
unexpected defeat and General Fu was killed. Hong went on to carve
out his own autonomous kingdom that remained free from imperial rule
until his death.
                                                                      77
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Six Dynasties Period China
During the Southern Song period General Tan Daoji launched an attack
against the north on behalf of the emperor. Throughout the campaign
he seized cities and destroyed fortifications, taking more than four
thousand prisoners. His advisors suggested that he should execute them
all and erect a victory mound with the dead.
Tan Daoji replied, "At this time we have attacked the guilty and
consoled the people. The army of a true king takes the upright as its
position, so why is it necessary to slay the people?"
He released all the prisoners and sent them back to their homes. These
former prisoners told their kinsmen of their capture and release and of
the fair treatment they received at the hands of general Tan. Thereupon
the barbarians dwelling in the region were elated, and wherever general
Tan went a great many came forward to give their allegiance to the
emperor.
Summary
Sun Zi wrote that if you place your troops in a desperate situation they
will fight for their lives. When the advantage of power lies in your
favour you must beware not to place the enemy's forces in a position
where they will fight to the end against you. By allowing the possibility
of escape you undermine the moral basis for a last ditch battle.
78
                                         Toss Out A Brick To Attract Jade
                          Pāo Zhuān Yǐn Yù
                               Strategy 17
              Toss Out A Brick To Attract Jade
      Bait them with the prospect of gain, bewilder and mystify
      them.
      Sun Zi, The Art of War
Prepare a trap, and then lure your enemy into the trap by using bait. In
war, the bait is the illusion of an opportunity for gain. In life, the bait is
the illusion of wealth, power, and sex.
Warring States Period China
The earl of Zhi was preparing to attack Lesser Wei. To prepare for his
attack he presented the king of Wei with four hundred mustangs and a
beautiful white jade Bi. 12 The king was overjoyed and his ministers all
12 A ceremonial jade ornament taking the shape of a carved disc or cylinder.
They were highly valued in ancient times though their exact purpose remains a
mystery.
                                                                           79
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
offered their congratulations, but one minister, Nanwen Ci, looked
distressed.
The king seeing his demeanor asked, "The great state is very pleased
with us! Why then do you look troubled?"
The minister replied, "One must always examine thoroughly a reward
given for no merit and deference shown where no force has been
applied. Four hundred mustangs and a white jade Bi constitute the kind
of gift a small state might give when serving a great one. But in this
case the larger state makes the gift. Your majesty should ponder this."
As a precaution, the king of Wei told his commander of the border
guards what his minister had cautioned and ordered his troops to be on
full alert.
Shortly thereafter, as the minister intimated, the earl of Zhi arrived at
the border with a large army. But when the earl saw the border guards
posted at full strength, he retired saying, "Alas, there are worthy men in
Wei, for they have anticipated my plans."
Han Dynasty China
During the Han dynasty, General Li Mu was sent north to deal with the
continuing problem of the Xiongnu. Every time General Li sought to
fight a decisive battle with the nomads they would melt away into the
endless expanse of the grasslands.
Seeking to entice them into a position where they could be attacked,
General Li devised the following strategy: He departed southwards
with the main body as if returning home, but he ordered that his
baggage train and accompanying heard of cattle lag behind.
The Xiongnu, believing the general had given up, saw an opportunity to
raid his trains and capture the prized herd. They followed behind the
retreating army waiting for the right moment to seize the baggage train.
Each day General Li allowed the baggage train to trail further behind
until he came to a fork in the road that was surrounded by gently rising
hills.
80
                                         Toss Out A Brick To Attract Jade
Judging this terrain to be ideal for his plans, General Li positioned his
best troops in ambush behind the hills. He then gave orders for the
baggage train to rest in the fork while the remainder of the army
continued along the road.
The Xiongnu, seeing the main body off in the distance while the
baggage train was resting unprotected, rushed into the valley to attack.
There they were ambushed from three sides, and over one hundred
thousand nomad cavalrymen were killed.
Three Kingdoms Period China
General Cao Cao of Wei used a similar tactic in his campaign against
his rival General Yuan Shao.
Hearing that Yuan Shao had crossed the Yellow River and captured a
vassal city of Yanjing, Cao Cao led an army out against him. As he
neared the enemy's territory Cao Cao had his column reverse positions
so that the baggage train led while the army took up the rear. He
ordered the army to lag further and further behind until the baggage
train was over two hours ride ahead of the main army. The baggage
train was thus the first to encounter the advancing army of Yuan Shao.
The train handlers and guards, upon seeing the approaching army,
abandoned the supplies and ran back down the road to warn Cao Cao of
Yuan Shao's approach.
Several advisors became anxious at this news but Cao Cao brushed off
their concerns and even ordered his men to dismount, abandon their
horses, and rest up on the side of a hill overlooking the main road. Soon
after, Yuan Shao's army slowly came down the road encumbered by the
plundered supplies from the baggage train.
When the Yuan soldiers saw the abandoned horses they ran about
wildly racing to round up as many horses as they could. With the Yuan
forces in such total disarray, Cao Cao ordered his infantry to charge
down the hill.
                                                                       81
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
The Yuan were caught by surprise and could not form battle lines. They
were completely routed and the scattered remnants of the army fled
back over the border.
Summary
To know where and when your enemy plans to move is to have the
advantage of foreknowledge. This can be accomplished by offering
your enemy something he greatly desires, then you can control when
and where he will be.
82
                        To Catch The Bandits First Capture Their Leader
                         Qín Zéi Qín Wáng
                               Strategy 18
  To Catch The Bandits First Capture Their Leader
     Deploy a detachment of shock troops and select commandos
     to focus their assault on the enemy's vital points. This is the
     way to slay their commanders.
     Sun Bin, Art of War
If the enemy's army is strong but is allied to the commander only by
money or threats then, take aim at the leader. If the commander falls,
the rest of the army will disperse or come over to your side. If, however,
they are allied to the leader through loyalty, then beware, the army can
continue to fight on after his death out of vengeance.
Spring And Autumn Period China
In 756 B.C. the rebel commander Yin Ziqi led an army to lay siege
against the strategic city of Suiyang.
                                                                       83
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
The defending commander, Zhang Xun, noticed that Yin Ziqi oversaw
the siege from well outside the range of the city's archers. He believed
that if he could take out the leader the rebel's morale would sink and he
would be able to launch a counter attack. He devised a plan with his
best archers.
The next time the rebels assailed the wall they were to shoot back using
the branches of trees. When Yin Ziqi heard that the defenders were
reduced to shooting with branches he felt certain the city was ready to
be taken.
Before the next assault, he moved in closer to better oversee the final
victory. Riding atop his horse he unknowingly came within range of the
archers who had saved their arrows for just such a moment.
One arrow hit Yin Ziqi in the left eye killing him instantly.
The spectacle of their commander's death in front of almost the entire
rebel army served to demoralize them to such an extent that they
quickly dispersed from the field.
Six Dynasties Period China
In A.D. 369 there were numerous rebellions against the rule of Emperor
Fu Jian of the former Qin dynasty. One rebel general, Li Yan, joined
forces with the local hill tribes and proclaimed himself governor of the
province of Yi.
Fu Jian sent his ablest commander Wang Meng to quell the rebellion.
Wang Meng promptly attacked and defeated Li Yan's outlying
command posts scattering the tribes back into the hills. Then he chased
Li Yan to the city of Fuhan where he laid siege to the city.
Li Yan was terrified of being executed and sent his younger brother to
seek terms of surrender from the emperor. Wang Meng called out for Li
Yan to surrender, but Yan would not come out from behind the city
walls.
84
                       To Catch The Bandits First Capture Their Leader
Another commander urged Wang to attack the walls but Wang Meng,
refused saying, "I received an imperial order to seize a rebel, not to
fight a war."
Instead of attacking the walls, Wang Meng employed a Trojan horse
strategy. He dressed himself in multi-layered white robes, mounted a
ceremonial carriage, and rode up the city gate accompanied by only
two unarmed attendants. There he announced that he had come alone
and unarmed to personally negotiate a peace treaty with Li Yan himself.
Yan, seeing that Wang posed no threat, finally agreed to negotiate and
he went to open the gate. Unseen from the city walls, were a handful of
armed soldiers, some hidden under Wang's robes, others clinging to the
underbelly of the carriage.
As soon as Li Yan walked out the gate, these hidden soldiers rushed out
and seized the rebel general so fast that his own troops were too
dumbfounded to react. They hustled him off in the carriage and Wang
Meng returned him to the capital. Without a leader, the province was
brought under control without any further battles.
Heian Period Japan
There was an aristocrat known by the name of Master Yoga who had a
dispute over the ownership of some rice paddies with another official
named Sawamata. One night, Master Yoga was woken from his sleep
to discover that Sawamata had launched a surprise attack. The attackers
numbered over six hundred men, and Master Yoga, with less than a
hundred retainers, was certain his fate was sealed.
Sawamata's troops surrounded the compound and set it ablaze with fire
arrows. Those who tried to escape the fire were shot down by the
archers. By morning all the defenders were dead. Sawamata ordered his
troops to bring him the head of Master Yoga but the bodies were so
charred they were unable to identify him, although they found his
armor on one of the corpses.
"In any case, no one escaped alive, not even a dog," said Sawamata. "I
am certain that Master Yoga is dead as well."
                                                                     85
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Sawamata and his men left the charred ruins to return home. On the
way back they stopped at the mansion of an elderly aristocrat to seek
food and fodder as well as medicine for their wounded.
Sawamata told his tale to the Great Prince who said, "I'm impressed
that you were able to kill Yoga in so brilliant a fashion. He was
extremely clever, a man of such ferocity and energy that I wouldn't
have expected you could trap him in his house and kill him. Well, now I
trust you have his head tied to your saddle and I would like to see it."
"That's a ridiculous request. I told you all that was left were burned
corpses. Surely, you wouldn't expect me to carry around such a
disgusting thing as a charred head," replied Sawamata.
"Yes, I understand. It is just that from an old man's experience I would
feel much more at ease if I knew his head was tied to your saddle just in
case it revived.
But since it isn't, I cannot take the risk that Yoga is still alive and that I
would be caught having to defend someone as unreasonable as you.
Therefore you must leave immediately! However, I will send you all the
provisions your men need."
Sawamata deferred to the elderly prince and he and his troops
continued along the road. A short time later several carts carrying the
food and fodder arrived and they stopped to unsaddle their horses and
heat the wine. After having fought through the night and then marching
until late day, Sawamata's troops were near exhaustion. They eagerly
drank down the wine and ate the food, after which they all fell asleep
along the side of the road.
Unbeknownst to Sawamata, Master Yoga was still alive. The night
before he had decided fighting was futile, so he dressed a corpse in his
armor and, with a handful of men, slipped through the latrine and swam
out through a narrow canal to escape.
While Sawamata was still at the Great Prince's mansion, Master Yoga
had managed to round up some men from the countryside so that they
now numbered fifty. A scout reported that Sawamata's troops were all
asleep in the fields not far away.
86
                        To Catch The Bandits First Capture Their Leader
Master Yoga turned to his men and said, "Now is the time to strike.
Presently they believe me dead and are drowsy from food and drink. If
we attack with our fifty men now we may still have a chance''
Master Yoga and his men attacked and caught Sawamata's troops by
complete surprise. Many fled in panic while others were slain reaching
for their saddles and weapons.
Sawamata was killed, and Master Yoga made sure to tie his head to his
saddle.
Summary
To kill a poisonous snake you must cut off the head. For if you should
you cut the snake in half, then the section containing the head may yet
coil suddenly and bite. To destroy an opponent you must destroy the
command structure to insure that the defeated do not merely find
another leader.
                                                                     87
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
88
                                    Steal the Firewood From Under the Pot
                            Fǔ Dǐ Chōu Xīn
                                Strategy 19
           Steal the Firewood From Under the Pot
      When attacking a strong force, it is difficult to attack it
      directly as it stands. In these cases, one attacks the corners.
      In large scale battles, after careful inspection of the enemy's
      forces, one can gain advantage by attacking the corners of
      exposed strategic points. When one has eliminated the
      strength of the corners, the strength of the whole will also be
      diminished.
      Miyamoto Musashi, The Book of Five Rings
When faced with an enemy too powerful to engage directly you must
first weaken him by undermining his foundation and attacking his
source of power.
Warring States Period China
The king of Wei had amassed and trained a large army with which he
intended to expand his territories. The strength of his army frightened
                                                                       89
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
several neighboring barons and princes into supporting his dreams of
conquest and, with twelve lords pressed into an alliance, he went to the
emperor to receive permission to increase his territories. 13
With his imperial blessing in hand, the king of Wei first set his sights
on Qin. The king of Qin realized his territory would be the first to fall
under the Wei expansion and convened his council for advice.
One advisor by the name of Wei Yang asked permission to travel to
Wei so that he could prevent the army from attacking.
"And how do you plan to accomplish this?" asked the king.
"Have you not heard that defeat can be achieved at a banquet, generals
captured while in a sitting room, cities razed between wine and the
spiced meat, and a battering ram broken by a sleeping mat?"
The king confessed he had not and gave permission for Wei Yang to
travel to Wei and try this unusual strategy.
When Wei Yang arrived at the Wei court, his reputation enabled him to
have an audience with the king.
There he said to the king, "Your majesty's accomplishments are great.
Your order is obeyed throughout the land, and you are leader of the
twelve lords. Soon you will control enough of the country to become
emperor. However, to be recognized as emperor you must look and act
like an emperor. The first step would be to build a palace befitting an
emperor of the realm."
The king was flattered and immediately began construction on a
massive scale to increase the size of his palaces.
Then Wei Yang told the king, "Now you must begin to look like an
emperor and wear the scarlet robes, raise the nine pennants of power,
and fly the flag of the Red Bird Constellation 14.”
13 This was just a formality since the Zhou Dynasty emperors were by this
time mere figureheads.
14 Regalia that only the emperor could display.
90
                                   Steal the Firewood From Under the Pot
The king could not resist flaunting his power openly and he was soon
walking about dressed in red robes and accompanied by imperial
pennants and flags.
It soon became apparent to everyone in the empire that the king of Wei
had visions of becoming emperor. This angered the noble houses,
especially those of the more powerful kingdoms of Chu and Qi, any
one of whom would have a far more legitimate claim to the throne than
that provincial upstart, the king of Wei.
Through Wei Yang's subtle manipulations the twelve lords were
persuaded to secretly switch their allegiance to Qi. When a large Qi
army penetrated the Wei border, the king of Wei called on the twelve
lords to stop the invasion. However, they captured the king instead and
placed him in prison.
When the Qi army arrived, they installed another prince on the throne
of Wei and, to prevent Wei from becoming too powerful in the future,
parceled out much of its territory to the neighboring kingdoms.
Thus, while the king of Qin sat calmly watching, Wei Yang was able to
avert the impending attack by Wei, bring down its king, and annex a
portion of Wei territory, without so much as drawing a weapon.
After receiving the king's honors Wei Yang said, "This is what is meant
by defeat achieved at a banquet, generals captured while in a sitting
room, cities razed between wine and the spiced meat, and a battering
ram broken by a sleeping mat."
Three Kingdoms Period China
The rebel warlord Cao Cao was on campaign against General Yuan
Shao when he was joined by a third general, Xu Yu, who inquired about
their current situation.
Cao Cao replied, "We have only one month of supplies left while
General Yuan has a year's worth of provisions stored within easy
access at his garrison at Wu Chao. As it stands now we will be defeated
within a month."
                                                                      91
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
General Yu thereupon devised the following stratagem. He ordered a
division of his elite cavalry to dress as Yuan troops and to muffle their
horse's hooves by wrapping them in cloth. The disguised cavalry set out
the next night carrying Yuan banners. Whenever they encountered a
real Yuan patrol or checkpoint, the captain would tell them they were
safeguarding Yuan's rear against a possible sneak attack.
Silently arriving at the garrison by dawn, the elite cavalry took the
Yuan troops by surprise and succeeded in setting fire to the stores.
When the report made its way through the Yuan army that their
provisions had been destroyed, they quickly surmised that they were
now the ones at risk of starvation. The Yuan troops lost their will to
fight and three days later General Yuan Shao was defeated and killed.
Legendary Era Japan
Japan's ancient hero Yamato Takeru was one of the eighty children of
Emperor Keiko. One day he was sent to kill a notorious outlaw who
was such an expert swordsman that all who had gotten in his way were
killed.
Yamato Takeru did not intend to duel with the bandit and pretended to
be ignorant of the man's reputation in order to befriend him. They
became such good friends that they even went swimming together on a
regular basis.
When Yamato Takeru was assured the bandit harbored no suspicions,
he was ready to act. One day when they went swimming, he brought
with him a wooden sword that he hid in his travel kit. They were in the
habit of racing each other around a small island, but this time while
they were racing Takeru let the bandit take the lead. Once he was out of
sight behind the island, Takeru swam back to shore and quickly
replaced the bandit's sword with the wooden one.
After they had gotten dressed, Takeru turned to the bandit and revealed
his true purpose. The bandit immediately went for his sword, but the
wooden sword had become wedged in the scabbard. While he was
struggling to draw the wooden sword, Takeru took the bandit's head off
in a single stroke.
92
                                    Steal the Firewood From Under the Pot
Summary
The source of an opponent's strength lies in either wealth, resources, or
manpower. If in wealth, cause him to incur expenses, if in resources,
disrupt the lines of distribution, if in manpower, sow discord.
                                                                       93
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
94
                                 Trouble the Water to Catch the Fish
                    Hún Shuǐ Mō Yú
                        Strategy 20
       Trouble the Water to Catch the Fish
Every day have the vanguard go forth and instigate
skirmishes with them in order to psychologically wear them
out.
Have our older and weaker soldiers drag brushwood to stir
up the dust, beat the drums and shout, and move back and
forth- some going to the left, some going to the right, never
getting any closer than a hundred paces from the enemy.
Their general will certainly become fatigued, and their troops
will become fearful. In this situation, the enemy will not dare
to come forward.
Then when we come forth with our three armies the enemy
will certainly be defeated.
The Six Secret Teachings of the Tai Gong
                                                                  95
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Before engaging your enemy's forces create confusion to weaken his
perception and judgment. Do something unusual, strange, and
unexpected as this will arouse the enemy's suspicion and disrupt his
thinking. A distracted enemy is thus more vulnerable.
Spring And Autumn Period China
In 632 B.C., the armies of Jin and Chu faced each other at Chengdu
before the battle of the same name. Chu sent an envoy to Jin requesting
to fight a chariot duel the next day to which the Jin ruler, Duke Wen,
agreed.
In the morning, Duke Wen climbed to the top of an observation tower
and looking down on his camp's preparations said, "Young and old
conduct themselves according to ritual. They are fit for use!"
He then ordered his troops to cut down trees to be used as part of an
unorthodox tactic. While the chariot duel was underway, Duke Wen
launched a sudden cavalry attack against the Chu right wing causing it
to collapse.
At the same time as the right was being pushed into the main body, the
Jin troops in the center raised the retreat pennants and began pulling
back. As the Jin troops retreated, they dragged behind them the trees
they had cut down earlier that morning. This raised such a dust cloud
that the Chu commanders thought the Jin were fleeing in panic and
eagerly gave chase.
When the main body of the Chu army was enveloped in the cloud of
dust they were unable to see that the Jin forces had split into two
divisions and had turned around.
The Jin attacked in a classical pincer movement on both of the Chu
flanks. The result was a resounding defeat after which the Chu general
was ordered to commit suicide.
Duke Wen had taken advantage of the distraction provided by the
chariot duel to launch both a surprise attack, and a retreat, manipulating
the Chu forces into a trap.
96
                                       Trouble the Water to Catch the Fish
Warring States Period China
The three central states of Qi, Wei, and Han made an alliance to attack
the northern state of Yan that in turn, sought help from the southern
state of Chu. The king of Chu sent his general Xing Yang to rescue Yan.
Unable to attack the combined forces concentrated in Yan, Xing Yang
used the strategy ‘Besiege Wei to Rescue Zhao’, and captured the Wei
city of Yongqiu.
Wei and Qi were concerned that with the enemy holding a fortified
position to their rear their lines of communication would be cut, so they
set off to recapture the city.
There were two roads that led to the city of Yongqiu and it was decided
that the Wei forces would occupy the western road while the Qi, the
eastern. This was to prevent Xing Yang from escaping.
Xing Yang had succeeded in drawing the enemy away from Yan but he
now had to extricate himself from a near hopeless situation. He resorted
to an unorthodox strategy.
Knowing the tenuous nature of any alliance during those ruthless times,
Xing Yang ordered the west gate opened. By day he sent riders and
carriages up the road towards the Wei camp but once they were out of
sight in the woods they would wait for a while, then turn around and
return. By night he had men run up and down the same road carrying
torches. The Qi observers thought that the daytime activity looked
suspiciously like envoys bearing gifts and tribute, while the nighttime
activity looked like messengers bearing urgent communications.
Believing that Wei had struck a deal with Xing Yang and that both
were preparing a sneak attack on them, the Qi army withdrew during
the night and returned home. The next day the Wei army learned that
Qi had abandoned the field and they were left alone to retake the city.
Thinking better of the idea, the Wei army also left the field, allowing
Xing Yang to return to Chu after having successfully rescued Yan.
                                                                        97
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Five Dynasties Period China
General Li Suyuan of Jin was sent to relieve the siege of Yuzhou and
drive the invading Khitan tribes out of the empire.
The Khitans set up defensive positions in advantageous terrain with the
intention of using the strategy ‘Await the Exhausted Enemy at Your
Ease’. Their plan was to attack the Jin troops before they had a chance
to form battle lines. However, General Li's scouts reported that the
Khitans were already waiting in formation, giving away their intentions.
Li Suyuan ordered his infantry to hold back while the weak and weary
soldiers went ahead dragging brushwood and burning fires as they
neared the Khitan formations. This created such a cloud of dust and
smoke that the Khitan commander could not see the Jin army and
assumed the dust was being kicked up by a large infantry. Seeing an
advantage, he ordered his men to break formation and attack what he
believed would be an army of Jin troops blinded by the smoke and dust.
But as the Khitans attacked, the Jin soldiers dropped their branches and
ran off so that the Khitans advanced through the dust cloud surprised to
discover no army there. As the disoriented Khitan army turned to
escape from the clouds of dust, Li Suyuan ordered his army to charge
in from the rear. The result was a rout and slaughter. The siege of
Yuzhou was lifted.
Summary
Man and beast alike will spontaneously pay attention to anything
unusual within their environment. Magicians, card sharks, pick pockets,
and prize fighters rely on this trait to momentarily trap the person's
attention elsewhere while they secretly carry out another action.
98
                               Shed Your Skin Like The Golden Cicada
                       Jīn Chán Tuō Qiào
                             Strategy 21
        Shed Your Skin Like The Golden Cicada
     Although it does not mindfully keep guard, in the small
     mountain fields, the scarecrow does not stand in vain.
     Bukkoku Kokushi, The Unfettered Mind, Takuan Sōhō
When you are in danger of being defeated, and your only chance is to
escape and regroup, then create an illusion. While the enemy's attention
is focused on this artifice, secretly remove your men leaving behind
only the facade of your presence.
Han Dynasty China
In 204 B.C. the king of Han, Gaozu, after escaping his exile through the
use of the strategy ‘Openly Repair the Walkway, Secretly March to
Chencang’ (see Chapter 8), suffered several defeats at the hands of his
old nemesis, the warlord of Chu, Xiang Yu.
                                                                      99
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Outnumbered and defeated, Gaozu fled with his remaining troops to
Zhongyang where he fortified the city and prepared to make a counter
attack. Xiang Yu, however, laid siege to the city cutting Gaozu's supply
lines and avenue of escape.
One of Gaozu's commanders, Ji Xin, devised a scheme to escape, he
said, "The situation is very grave. I beg you to let me deceive Xiang Yu
for you by taking your place as king. In this way you will be able to slip
away in secret."
Gaozu agreed and, while he prepared his escape, Ji Xin had two
thousand women from the city dressed like Han soldiers. Before dawn,
he had the women march out the front gate and form battle lines. The
army of Xiang Yu rushed to formation expecting a final showdown
with Han.
As the first light of dawn began to break, Ji Xin rode forth in the yellow
draped imperial carriage of the king and announced to the Chu army,
"The food in the city is exhausted. The king of Han surrenders!"
While the army of Chu was celebrating their victory, the king of Han
and thirty horsemen slipped quietly out of the city. When Xiang Yu
learned of the deception he had General Ji Xin burned to death. The
king of Han made good his escape and two years later returned at the
head of a new army. This time he was victorious while the defeated
Xiang Yu was hunted down.
The final scene in Xiang Yu's life is one of the most poignant in China's
history. Xiang Yu had fled to the bank of the Yellow River with a Han
detachment hot on his heels. He was alone since every one of his
commanders were now dead or had turned traitor. There was a
ferryman who recognized the great general of Chu and urged him to
cross over the river before the Han troops arrived.
But Xiang Yu refused saying, "I left with the sons and fathers and
husbands of Chu, but to return alone without them, how could I face
the people with such shame."
Instead he paid the ferryman to take his favorite stallion across and free
him on the other side. By this time the Han soldiers had arrived and,
100
                                 Shed Your Skin Like The Golden Cicada
spotting an old comrade among the troops, Xiang Yu called out, "I hear
there is a reward for my head. Since you were a friend of mine I give
you this parting gift!"
And with that he drew his sword and cut his throat. The Han soldiers
rushed to retrieve his head and in the melee cut him to pieces.
His faithful horse jumped off the boat to swim back but was swept
away by the currents and drowned.
Gaozu went on to found China's longest dynasty, the Han, in 202 B.C.
Three Kingdoms Period China
The warlord Cao Cao of Wei was pursuing the fleeing army and
population of Shu, led by the ‘Heroes of the Peach Grove’ 15 - Liu Bei
and Zhang Fei. The retreating column came upon the Changpan Bridge
over the Wei River with the enemy army only hours behind. On the
opposite side of the river, there was heavy forest.
Zhang Fei turned to Liu Bei and said, "This bridge is the only crossing
point for miles, and provides us with an advantage. You take the army
and people across while I hold off the Wei army to give you as much of
a lead as possible."
After the Shu army had crossed over, Zhang Fei sent his small group of
cavalrymen across the bridge into the forest where they tied branches to
their horse's tails and rode around in circles. Zhang Fei remained sitting
on his charger in the middle of the bridge.
When the pursuing army of Wei came upon the sight of Zhang Fei
alone on the bridge they stopped. Cao Cao noticed the huge dust cloud
in the distance behind the woods and suspected a trap. Zhang Fei roared
out a challenge to the Wei army but Cao Cao, now convinced this was a
ruse, turned his men around to retreat.
15 So called because they swore the oath of brotherhood in a peach grove. A
similar oath is sworn by members of almost every secret brotherhood in China
ever since.
                                                                        101
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Zhang Fei seeing the Wei army retreating spurred his charger towards
the Wei as though to attack them single-handedly. This so unnerved the
Wei forces that they made a mad scramble to escape the area convinced
a trap was closing around them. This trick bought Liu Bei and Zhang
Fei enough time to escape with their men and regroup at Jiangling.
Six Dynasties Period China
In A.D. 431 the Song emperor, Wendi, launched a campaign to win
back the province of Henan that was under the control of the kingdom
of Wei.
The emperor sent his general, Tao Cu, to attack Wei. The Song army
fought and won more than thirty engagements, penetrating deep into
Wei territory. Now, every commander knows that when an army is
deep inside enemy territory his supply lines are the most crucial and
vulnerable.
Wei took advantage of this weakness to secretly send a detachment of
cavalry that succeeded in cutting off the Song supply lines. The Song
army was without provisions and in desperate straits. Tao Cu was
planning to retreat, but this would leave the army extremely vulnerable
to a rout and slaughter. To make matters worse, many of his soldiers,
afraid and starving, deserted to the Wei side and divulged to Tao Cu's
the plan to retreat.
The Wei readied their forces to pursue the Song the instant they broke
camp. To avert the impending tragedy, Tao Cu devised a stratagem.
During the night he ordered his troops to carry baskets of sand and pile
them into great heaps within the compound. The Wei scouts, listening
to the night-long commotion, were curious and crept closer to the Song
positions in order to see by first light what was happening. Tao Cu then
had the piles of sand covered by a thin layer of grain.
The next morning the Wei scouts were shocked to see huge piles of
grain that they assumed were smuggled in during the night. When the
Wei commander heard this, he suspected that the deserters' reports
were a ruse to lure him into a trap, and had them all executed.
102
                                  Shed Your Skin Like The Golden Cicada
The Wei canceled their planned attack. Two days later the Song army
quietly escaped to their home territory.
Hojo Regency Japan
In 1331 the emperor Go Oaigo rebelled against the Hojo Shogunate
which had ruled over a series of puppet emperors. The emperor fled
Kyoto with the imperial regalia and took refuge in a mountain
monastery. 16 The emperor's loyal commander, Kusunoki Masashige,
in order to divert the impending attack away from the emperor, erected
a wooden palisade on the side of the mountain.
When the Hojo army arrived, they saw the poor construction of the
defenses and rushed to attack the encampment. Kusunoki's troops,
though numbering less than five hundred, had constructed several
ingenious defenses such as pitfalls, trenches, and logs suspended along
the steep slopes that they could unleash to roll down onto the advancing
attackers.
After several failed attacks, the Hojo troops resolved to blockade the
fort and starve the defenders out. Kusunoki had only a few days' worth
of supplies left, and he knew that his troops would soon be too weak to
fight. So he devised a strategy in which he could escape without pursuit.
A huge funeral pyre was prepared and covered with the bodies
recovered from the battlefield. One volunteer remained behind to light
the fire and wait for the Hojo troops.
Under cover of darkness, Kusunoki and his troops quietly escaped
through a hidden trench cut through the stockade. Once they were in
the mountain forests, their familiarity with the terrain enabled them to
disperse into the undergrowth. At the same time, the funeral pyre was
set ablaze and it burned so brightly that it lit up the sky.
Hojo sent scouts to find out the cause of the blaze. When they found the
compound undefended, the Hojo troops rushed in only to find a huge
funeral pyre with a solitary attendant kneeling before the fire.
16 Consisting of a mirror, sword, and jewels. They were akin to the nine
imperial tripods of ancient China - emblematic of the right to rule.
                                                                     103
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
When he was questioned, he told them that Kusunoki and his troops,
knowing they would be defeated, committed suicide en mass. As the
Hojo could see burning bodies among the embers they believed the
story and did not search for any remaining troops.
Kusunoki escaped that night and he continued to fight for the imperial
house for another seven years. He became known as one of Japan's
greatest heroes renowned for his unflinching loyalty to the emperor.
Summary
It is a well-known rule of war that troops are extremely vulnerable
when retreating. A strong attack against retreating troops usually leads
to a rout and slaughter. Whenever you are moving troops, leave behind
something that will divert or slow potential pursuers.
104
                                       Shut The Door To Catch The Thief
                         Guān Mén Zhuō Zéi
                               Strategy 22
               Shut the Door to Catch the Thief
     When one fights an opponent and it appears on the surface
     that he has been defeated, if his fighting spirit has not yet
     been eradicated in his heart of hearts, he will not
     acknowledge defeat.
     In that case, you must quickly change your mental attitude
     and break the opponent's fighting spirit.
     You must make him acknowledge defeat from the bottom of
     his heart. It is essential to make sure of that.
     Miyamoto Musashi. The Book of Five Rings
If you have the chance to completely capture the enemy, then you
should do so, thereby bringing the battle or war to a quick and lasting
conclusion. To allow your enemy to escape plants the seeds for future
conflict. But if they succeed in escaping, be wary of giving chase.
                                                                    105
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Warring States Period China
In 449 B.C. the state of Wu had invaded the state of Yue and carried off
its duke, Guo Jian, holding him prisoner for three years before
releasing him back to his kingdom.
When he returned, Guo Jian planned his revenge. For seven years, he
ruled with benevolence and generosity, making a reputation as a wise
and virtuous ruler until he felt his loyal subjects were prepared to
undergo any hardship for him. He accordingly assembled his forces and
attacked Wu, gaining a decisive victory (see Chapter 5).
The king of Wu had to flee, but it would only be a matter of time before
he was caught. He sent ambassadors to Guo Jian begging for mercy.
They reminded him of how the state of Wu had released him to return
to his own state. The king of Wu now asked to be granted the same
favor.
Guo Jian was contemplating granting this appeal when his prime
minister Fan Li intervened and said, "When heaven gave the duke of
Wu the grand opportunity for gaining power, he did not take advantage
of it, and so he is a fugitive today.
Should you fail to accept what fortune has now given you, you may be
driven from your state, and then all the years of hardships you have
borne will have been endured in vain."
The duke was swayed by the argument and sent the ambassador back
with the message that he would not grant any mercy.
When the king of Wu received the message, he gave up all hope and
committed suicide.
Tang Dynasty China
One of China's most notorious female rulers was the Empress Wu.
After dethroning her son, Emperor Zhongzong, she took over the
empire and ruled for twenty-two years.
106
                                       Shut The Door To Catch The Thief
During one of the innumerable court intrigues that took place during
her reign, she suspected two high and corrupt officials of plotting to
usurp her power.
Using the strategy ‘It Takes a Thief to Catch a Thief’, she ordered one
of those officials, Lai Junchen, to interrogate the other, Zhou Xing.
Seeing an opportunity to escape suspicion while eliminating a rival, Lai
invited Zhou for dinner and wine to discuss criminal cases. While
pouring wine for his guest Lai asked, "Now with some prisoners they
simply refuse to confess to their crime. Do you have any suggestions on
how they might be made to cooperate?"
“That's very easy," answered Zhou. "You simply take a large metal vat,
fill it with water, and place it over a fire until the water is near boiling.
Then order the prisoners to get into the vat. They will confess anything
and everything."
"Excellent," said Lai, who then ordered a large vat to be brought in and
heated the way Zhou had advised. When the water was near boiling Lai
stood up from his table and said, "I have received an imperial order to
interrogate you on your involvement in a treasonous plot. Now would
you please step into the vat."
Zhou was terrified and immediately dropped to his knees to kowtow.
He confessed his involvement, and implicated his co-conspirators. All
were executed.
Muromachi Period Japan
In 1554 Mori Montanari sought to avenge the death of his lord, Suye
Harukata, who had been overthrown in a palace coup and forced to
commit suicide by another retainer. Mori was greatly outnumbered and
so decided a stratagem was needed.
He constructed a castle on the small island of Miyajima, situated in the
inland sea near Hiroshima Bay. After the castle was completed, he
spread the story that he was regretting his decision since he now
realized how susceptible he was to attack by the Suye forces.
                                                                          107
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
When the story reached Suye Harukata he thought it an excellent
suggestion and promptly set off to take the castle. The castle turned out
to be poorly defended and Suye took the island without bloodshed. He
stationed five hundred troops in the castle and the rest of his thirty
thousand troops were bivouacked on the island.
Meanwhile Mori Montanari captured the town of Kuatsu, directly
across the straight from the island. Harukata's troops were
overconfident from their easy capture of the island and they failed to
even post guards. Mori counted on the element of surprise and chose a
moonless night to launch his attack. He hired local pirates to ferry his
troops over and made them agree to immediately return so that neither
army had the opportunity to escape.
Mori divided his flotilla into two columns: one went to the north of the
island to attack the Suye from the rear, while the second column
crossed further to the south and then hugged the island's coastline to
attack from the front. That night there happened to be a blinding
rainstorm which further helped conceal the flotilla's approach. Both
divisions attacked at dawn and, as expected, caught the Suye army by
surprise.
Finding that there were no boats in which to escape (it is presumed that
the Mori troops scuttled or burned the ships that carried the Suye troops
over), the Suye troops committed suicide by the hundreds. Mori had
succeeded in luring his enemy into a position from which there was no
escape, and in a single decisive battle completely wiped out his
opponent.
Summary
While it is dangerous to corner your opponent into fighting to the death,
it is equally dangerous to allow that opponent to escape with a hope of
revenge. When you have your enemy cornered, leave a door open until
his thoughts turn to escape and freedom, then close the trap and destroy
him.
108
                        Befriend A Distant Enemy To Attack One Nearby
                         Yuǎn Jiāo Jìn Gōng
                                Strategy 23
   Befriend A Distant Enemy To Attack One Nearby
       Let us proceed with caution, concentrating our strength, and
      add to it daily by winning over to our side those barons who
      are vassals of the enemy. Then, when the enemy stands alone,
      like a tree shorn of its leaves and branches, we will attack
      and destroy the root.
      Toyotomi Hideyoshi
It is known that nations that border each other become enemies while
nations separated by distance and obstacles make better allies. When
you are the strongest in one field, your greatest threat is from the
second strongest in your field, not the strongest from another field.
Spring And Autumn Period China
In 628 B.C. the states of Jin and Qin joined forces to attack the state of
Zheng. They laid siege to the capital, trapping the king in the city.
Vastly outnumbered, the king of Zheng could not hope to win militarily.
                                                                      109
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
His prime minister said, "The state is in imminent peril. If you summon
your old advisor, Chu Zhiwu, and send him to Qin I'm sure he can
convince them to depart."
The king agreed and summoned the old advisor to explain his mission.
That night Chu was lowered from the walls on a rope and he secretly
made his way into the Qin camp.
Meeting with the earl of Qin he said, "With Jin and Qin both besieging
its capital, Zheng knows that it must perish. If the ruin of Zheng were to
be of benefit to you I would not dare to speak to you. But you know
what difficulties could arise in trying to maintain such a distant border
from your capital. It would be constantly threatened by other states. Of
what advantage is it to you to destroy Zheng to benefit your neighbor?
His advantage will be your disadvantage. And moreover, previously
you helped the duke of Jin to attain his position and he promised you
two cities as a reward. But as soon as he was in his own state again he
built defenses around the two cities.
Surely you can see that he is greedy. If you help him to annex Zheng to
his domains, who will be next to lose territory to his insatiable hunger?
Furthermore, if you agree to depart, the king of Zheng will give you
provisions for your army and gifts for yourself. Surely this is no injury.
But I leave it up to you to decide whether to diminish Zheng in order to
advantage Jin.
The next morning the Qin army left the field. When the duke of Jin saw
them returning he also withdrew and Zheng was spared.
Warring States Period China
The king of Wei was attacking the capital of Zhao and demanded
troops from Song. The ruler of Song secretly sent an envoy to the king
of Zhao to say, "The forces of Wei are vigorous and their power is
great. Presently they are demanding troops from Song to use against
you.
110
                       Befriend A Distant Enemy To Attack One Nearby
My lord is afraid that if he does not comply it will mean the end of his
country. But if Wei should attack Zhao and truly harm her, my lord
could not bear it."
The king of Zhao replied, "What can I do to help you?"
"I shall request from you a border town which we will attack slowly.
We will spend many days trying to take the town until the time is right
for you to send down your officers and reclaim the place again."
"Excellent!" said the king of Zhao.
The Song forces marched out and laid siege to the border town. The
king of Wei was happy and said, "The Song forces are aiding my
attack." The king of Zhao was also happy and said, 'The Song forces
will not go any further."
A few months later Song's troops were retired, the crisis avoided, Wei
was grateful, and Zhao suspected nothing.
Han Dynasty China
In A.D.110, the province of Henan had suffered through droughts and
floods, the harvests were poor and the people starving. The corrupt
government only made matters worse, and soon the whole province
was in chaos. Any hope of bringing in outside relief was thwarted by
the numerous bands of bandits and robbers that roamed the countryside
pillaging and terrorizing the population.
A provincial official by the name of Yu Hu was appointed full powers
to try to restore some order to the province. When he arrived at the
district capital, he issued a notice that he was going to organize a
military force and that he was looking for recruits.
First, he promised a pardon for past crimes and immunity for anyone
who joined up. Then he announced that he was looking for men for
three classes of troops. The first class of troops were to consist of men
who had committed robbery and murder. They would be the
commanders and receive the highest salaries.
                                                                       111
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
The second class would consist of men who had committed mere
thievery. They would receive the next highest salaries.
The third class would consist of men who had joined the robber bands
simply because they were lazy and wished to avoid real labor. They
would be paid the lowest salaries.
Within a couple of weeks, Yu Hu had over three hundred new recruits.
When they had been issued uniforms and weapons he had them paraded
before him and said to them, "Your past deeds are now forgiven and
you are free from prosecution. But you must still atone for the crimes
you have committed against society. To do this you must now go out
and hunt down all your past colleagues who have not answered my
call."
This they did and within a year the fraternity of bandits was extinct and
the countryside made safe.
Summary
It is well known that a friend of your enemy becomes your enemy
while an enemy of your enemy becomes your friend. Every powerful
person, organization, or state will automatically create people, groups,
and organizations that stand in opposition to it. To attack any objective,
one can enlist the aid of those institutions that are the antithesis of your
opponent's.
112
                                        Borrow The Road To Conquer Guo
                           Jiǎ Dào Fá Guó
                              Strategy 24
             Borrow The Road To Conquer Guo
     A samurai in service may be said to borrow his master's
     authority and also rob him of it. And similarly his lord may
     lend it to him or let him steal it.
     Daidoji Yuzan, Budo Shoshinshu
Borrow the resources of an ally to attack a common enemy. Once the
enemy is defeated, use those resources to turn on the ally that lent you
them in the first place.
Spring And Autumn Period China
The small states of Yu and Guo bordered the larger state of Jin. Duke
Xian of Jin desired to conquer both states. This desire was not unknown
to the two smaller states and both had taken steps to defend their
borders with Jin.
                                                                     113
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
The duke's general, Xun Xi, suggested they make a roundabout attack at
Guo through the state of Yu to catch them by surprise.
General Xun suggested that since the duke of Yu was a greedy man he
could be bribed with gifts of jade and horses in exchange for safe
passage through his territory.
Duke Xian objected to the idea of giving away so much treasure and
asked, "What if the duke of Yu accepts our gifts but refuses us
passage?''
General Xun replied, "If he doesn't intend to let us through, then he
wouldn't accept them, but if he does accept the gifts, and he does let us
through, then it will only mean that the treasure is stored temporarily
in his storehouse rather than ours."
When the bribe was sent to the duke of Yu one of his ministers, Gong
Ziqi, cautioned against accepting them saying, "Yu is to Guo, like lips
are to teeth. Our ancestors had a saying: 'If the lips are gone, the teeth
will be exposed to cold.' Guo's existence depends on Yu, while Yu's
ability to survive hinges on Guo.
If we make way for Jin, then the day will see Guo perish in the morning
only to be followed by Yu in the evening. Why should we ever let Jin
pass?"
The duke of Yu, however, refused to listen to this advice.
Jin was given safe passage and succeeded in conquering Guo. On their
way back they stopped to conquer Yu. After taking the Yu capital and
recovering the treasure, General Xun returned the jade and horses to the
duke.
Duke Xian was pleased and said in good humor, "The jade is
untouched but the horses seem to have gained some more teeth!"
Warring States Period China
King Xiong of Qi was of an ungenerous nature. During his father's rule,
Qi's ablest general was Tian Dan, who had distinguished himself
114
                                      Borrow The Road To Conquer Guo
during the war with Yan. When he was still the heir apparent, Xiong
worried that the renowned general would seize the throne for himself
after the king's death. But Tian Dan was too loyal to contemplate such a
move and when Xiong ascended the throne he served under him as
minister.
One day while Tian Dan was inspecting the countryside, he came upon
an old man who had just crossed a river. The water was so cold that the
old man had collapsed on the bank, too weak to move. When Tian Dan
saw this he dismounted and wrapped his own fur cloak around the old
man to warm him.
When King Xiong heard this he hated Tian Dan and cried aloud, "Why
would Tian Dan do a thing like that if he did not intend to take my
kingdom from me?17 I must have a plan to use against him now or I
will be too late."
He looked about for someone to advise him, but the court was empty.
Looking out his balcony the king noticed a bead stringer in the street
below and called out to him, "Did you hear what I just said?"
"I did," replied the bead stringer.
"And what do you think I should do about this?" asked the king. "If I
were the king I would use him to make me appear good."
 "How?"
"You should praise the goodness of Tian Dan and issue a statement
saying,
'When we are troubled by famine Dan feeds them; when we grieve that
our citizens are cold, Dan gives them the cloak from his back. When we
are troubled over our people, Dan is troubled. In gauging his king's
intentions, none is the equal of Dan, and I praise him.'
17 In ancient China, any official who acted in an upright and moral manner
immediately fell under suspicion, since such behaviour was thought to be a
first step in achieving power.
                                                                       115
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
In this way Dan's virtue will become the king's virtue."
"Excellent!" said the king and the next day he summoned Tian Dan to
court. There the king bowed before Tian Dan praising his virtue and
awarding him with honors. Then the king turned to the assembly and
said, "If any officer should find the people cold and hungry, then he
should receive them and provide warmth and food. In this way you
would serve your king."
The next day the king's spies returned with the report that in every
village the people were saying, "Tian Dan's love for the people is
nothing more than carrying out the orders of the king!"
Yuan Dynasty China
In 1293, the Great Kahn sent twenty thousand troops to subdue the
island of Java under the pretext of avenging the murder and mutilation
of a Mongol envoy sent earlier. (A more likely explanation is that the
Mongols wished to control the lucrative spice trade in the Moluccas.)
Using the strategy ‘Borrow the Road to Conquer Guo’, the Mongols
made allies with a rebel Javanese prince and his army. Together they
succeeded in destroying the local king. However, once the king was
defeated the rebel prince quickly turned on his Mongol allies forcing
them off the island.
Thus the rebel prince used the Mongol sword to destroy his enemy, and
then he used the tactic of ‘Exchange the Role of Guest for That of
Host’ to turn on the Mongols after they had weakened themselves
fighting the old king.
Summary
In the struggle for power, alliances are formed only if both parties
believe they can profit from each other. These alliances last until one
party no longer finds profit in the other. The aid you lend an ally might
as easily be used against you. It depends whether your ally should find
it more profitable to return the favor, or become your enemy.
116
                               Replace The Beams With Rotten Timbers
                       Tōu Liáng Huàn Zhù
                              Strategy 25
        Replace The Beams With Rotten Timbers
     The general is the supporting pillar of the state. If his talents
     are all-encompassing, the state will invariably be strong. If
     the supporting pillar is marked by fissures, the state will
     invariably grow weak.
     Sun Zi, The Art of War
Disrupt the enemy's formations, interfere with their methods of
operations, change the rules in which they are used to following, and go
contrary to their standard training. In this way, you remove the
supporting pillar, the common link which makes a group of men an
effective fighting force.
Warring States Period China
In 259 B.C., Qin invaded Zhao, the two armies confronting each other
at Changping. After several skirmishes, the Zhao forces dug in and
waited behind fortified positions refusing to come out despite daily
                                                                       117
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
taunts from the enemy. Knowing it was futile to lure the Zhao out, and
that a prolonged stalemate worked in their favor, the Qin general
schemed to remove the Zhao general leading the defense.
Spies were sent to the Zhao camp to spread the rumor that the one thing
Qin feared was that Zhao Kuo, son of the famous general Zhao She,
would be put in charge of the army. When reports of this rumor reached
the king, he relieved the current commander and replaced him with
Zhao Kuo.
What the king of Zhao did not know was that years earlier when the
famous general Zhao She was still alive he had tested his son on the art
of war and found him wanting. While the son proved knowledgeable in
all aspects of war, his father still disapproved.
When asked why, he told his wife, "To fight war entails fatal danger,
but Zhao Kuo passed it off as something easy in his talk. It would be
better if our king did not appoint him as commander. If he does, he will
surely be the one to lead our troops to doom."
When Zhao Kuo took over command, he set about restructuring the
army, reissuing orders and rules, and dismissing many senior officers.
When the Qin general heard of this, he attacked. Using the strategy
‘Lure the Tiger Down the Mountain’ he faked a retreat. Zhao,
overconfident and self-assured, assumed the retreat to be real and
abandoned his fortifications to give chase. The Qin then circled back
and destroyed the Zhao supply depot.
Forty days later the Zhao troops were starving. Zhao Kuo and his
personal guard made a last stand against the Qin, but were brought
down in a hail of arrows.
The Qin general knew that a seasoned general would never fall for such
an obvious tactic, but playing on the younger general's weakness, he
succeeded in neutralizing their initial advantage.
118
                                Replace The Beams With Rotten Timbers
Warring States Period China
Almost thirty-one years later, in 228 B.C., Qin was again attacking
Zhao, but for the last time. During the previous years, Qin had
continued to expand, eating up smaller kingdoms on its borders. Once a
mighty state, Zhao had been reduced to bribing Qin with territory as it
frantically tried to buy time to rebuild its army.
Zhao's only hope lay in the prowess of its leading general, Li Mu, to
rally the remaining troops and devise some stratagem to save them
from almost certain annihilation.
The equally famous Qin general Wang Jian schemed to remove the
pillar of the Zhao state through court intrigue.
Now, it was known that King Yu of Zhao kept a homosexual lover by
the name of Han Cang to whom he turned for advice in running the
state. Han Cang was jealous of General Li's acclaim and eagerly
accepted a bribe from Qin to slander Li, saying he was conspiring with
Qin to commit treason.
General Li was summoned to court where Han Cang read out the
charges. "You were seen in the presence of the king with a dagger
concealed in your sleeve. Thus you must have been plotting
assassination. The penalty is execution!"
"But what you saw up my sleeve was not the handle of a dagger, but a
splint for my crippled arm," replied Li Mu. "My left arm is crippled and
weak. When kneeling at court I have difficulty rising and, since I do not
wish to cause a distraction before his Majesty, I bound a splint to my
arm so that I could rise without difficulty."
But Han Cang was not swayed, he said, "My instructions are to have
you executed without argument. There will be no pardon. However, as
a concession I will allow you to commit suicide."18
Li Mu bowed gratefully and retired from the audience chamber to fall
upon his sword. However, his crippled arm would not extend far
18 Since punishments for treason in those days were particularly gruesome.
                                                                          119
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
enough to allow him to hold the tip to his belly, so he placed the sword
in his mouth, dashed against a pillar, and killed himself.
Five months later Qin attacked and Zhao was destroyed forever.
Six Dynasties Period China
In the year 383, Emperor Fu Jian of Qin personally led a cavalry of
five thousand mounted soldiers to attack General Xie Shi of Jin.
Discovering that the Jin forces were greater than he anticipated, the
emperor had his army form defensive positions along the bank of the
river. The Jin armies likewise encamped on the opposite side. Neither
side wished to cross first, since it was well known that an army is most
vulnerable when crossing a river.
General Shi sent an envoy across the river with a message that read,
"My lord, your army has entered deeply into our territory, and in
deploying your ranks you have crowded upon the river. This is the plan
for a lengthy stalemate. Do you really want to fight? If you will order
your men to withdraw to a safe distance and allow us to cross we can
then fight it out and settle the matter quickly."
The emperor agreed to the request. When his advisors objected,
Emperor Fu Jian told them that he planned to turn his army about and
attack the Jin after half their troops had crossed.
But General Xie anticipated the emperor's treachery and sent scouts
disguised as imperial troops to infiltrate the Qin ranks. When the
emperor ordered his army to pull back, the disguised Jin troops began
to incite panic by spreading the rumor that Qin was withdrawing in
defeat and that Jin was in hot pursuit. The retreat quickly turned into a
rout as the Qin troops broke formation to escape.
The emperor and his generals raced frantically after the fleeing soldiers
with whips in hand to stop them, but to no avail. The Jin army quickly
crossed the river and pursued the Qin forces, inflicting enormous
casualties. The emperor was wounded and narrowly escaped. He was
captured and strangled a few weeks later
120
                               Replace The Beams With Rotten Timbers
Summary
Commanding a large body of men is like dealing with an unthinking
beast: its actions are not determined so much by what is logical as by
circumstance of terrain and habit. An army that is invincible in a certain
formation can be useless if that formation is broken. By changing the
rules and habits under which the enemy is used to fighting, you take
away his physical and moral foundation.
                                                                       121
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
122
                      Point At The Mulberry But Curse The Locust Tree
                         Zhǐ Sāng Mà Huái
                             Strategy 26
 Point At The Mulberry But Curse The Locust Tree
     Under hurtful accusations often lies a weak case.
     Chinese Proverb
     A lie told by one, becomes truth when told by hundreds.
     Chinese Proverb
To discipline, control, or warn others whose status or position excludes
them from direct confrontation, use analogy and innuendo. Without
directly naming names, those accused cannot retaliate without revealing
their complicity.
Spring and Autumn Period China
Duke Jing of Qi appointed Sima Rangchu as General of the Army to
lead the soldiers against Qin.
                                                                     123
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Sima said, "I was formerly lowly and menial. If my lord pulls me out
from my village and places me above the high officials, the officers and
troops will not be submissive and the 'Hundred Surnames'' will not
believe in me. 19
Since I am insignificant and my authority light, I would like to have one
of my lord's favored ministers, someone whom the state respects, as
supervisor of the army. Then it will be possible."
Duke Jing consented and appointed Zhuang Jia as supervisor. Sima
met with Zhuang Jia and they agreed that they would begin the march
at midday the next day. Sima went on ahead to the army camp where he
gave orders to prepare for the next day's departure. He also ordered his
guards to place a water clock in the parade grounds.
The next day Zhuang, who had always been arrogant and aristocratic,
assumed that since Sima was already at the army camp and
preparations were underway, it was not urgent for him to be there. His
friends and relatives from all around gathered to detain him with drinks
and entertainment. By midday Zhuang had still not arrived so Sima
gave orders for the army to depart. By evening Zhuang had finally
caught up with the army.
Sima asked, "How is it that you arrived after the appointed time?"
Zhuang acknowledged his fault saying, "High officials and relatives
saw this simple one off, and thus I was detained."
Sima said, "On the day a general receives the mandate of command, he
forgets his home; when he enters the army and takes control of the
soldiers, he forgets his loved ones; when he takes hold of the drum
sticks and urgently beats the drum, he forgets himself.
At present, enemy states have already deeply invaded our lands, while
within the state there is unrest and movement. Officers and soldiers lie
brutally cut down and exposed on the borders.
19 An expression used to designate the Chinese people.Legend has it that 100
tribes immigrated to China in the 3rd millennial B.C.and are considered the
ancestors of the modern Chinese.
124
                       Point At The Mulberry But Curse The Locust Tree
The fate of the entire population hangs upon you, so what do you mean
by being seen off?"
Zhuang was speechless. Sima then summoned the provost marshal and
inquired, "What is the army's law regarding those who arrive after the
appointed time?"
He replied, ''They should be beheaded!"
Zhuang was terrified and sent a messenger racing back to the capital to
have the duke issue an immediate pardon. But before the messenger
returned with the pardon, Zhuang had already been executed.
Thereafter the officials and nobles were all terrified of Sima and no one
dared hesitate in following his orders
Han Dynasty China
After Gaozu had become emperor he invested many of his followers.
One day, while he was strolling along the balcony of his palace in
Luoyang, he noticed several ministers milling about below speaking in
hushed tones.
"What are they talking about?" he asked his advisor, Zhang Liang.
"Your majesty does not know?" replied Zhang, "They are plotting a
revolt."
"But peace and order have just been restored to the empire. Why
should they be planning a revolt?"
"When your majesty rose from among the common people, it was
through these men that you seized control of the empire. You have
become the Son of Heaven, but those whom you have invested have all
been close friends from the old days, while you have had your enemies
of former times executed.
Now these officers of your army, reckoning up the merits they have won,
believe that there is not sufficient land in the whole empire to invest
them all. So, some of them fear they will not receive their just allotment,
                                                                       125
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
while others tremble, lest, falling under suspicion for some error of
their past, they be condemned to execution. Therefore they gather
together in this way and plot rebellion."
"What should I do?" asked the emperor.
"Among all your followers whom do you dislike the most?" inquired
Zhang Liang.
"Yong Chi and I are ancient enemies," replied the emperor. "Many
times in the past he has brought me trouble and shame. I would like to
have killed him, but because his merit is great, I have not had the
heart."
"You must hurry and invest Yong Chi before anyone else, and make
known what you have done to your other followers. When they see
Yong Chi has been invested, they will all feel assured of their own
rewards," said Zhang Liang.
The emperor agreed and held a feast to bestow Yang Chi with lands
and titles.
When the other ministers left the banquet they said to each other
happily, "If even Yong Chi can become a marquis, the rest of us have
nothing to worry about!"
Han Dynasty China
In 195 B.C. Gaozu, the founder of the Han Dynasty, died. His wife, the
Dowager Empress Lu, thereupon set about seizing power for herself
and her clan. First, she had two princes assassinated, a third driven to
suicide, and their kingdoms handed over to members of her own family.
The empress also disposed of numerous ministers and advisors, not to
mention all the former concubines of her late husband. Then she placed
an infant on the throne claiming it to be the son of Gaozu when in fact
she had stolen the infant and had the mother executed to cover the
affair.
The emperor's family line of Liu was in danger of being eclipsed by the
newly powerful Lu clan. One marquis of the imperial line, Liu Chang,
126
                      Point At The Mulberry But Curse The Locust Tree
was embittered that his family was effectively ousted from holding
position at court, and was determined to resist the empress's designs.
Once, at a banquet held at the palace, the empress appointed Liu Chang
to act as master of wine. This was meant as an insult, being asked to
serve at a banquet, but Liu Chang did not show any offense. He asked
the empress, "Since I come from a family of generals, I would like to
direct the dispensing of wine in accordance with the rules of the army."
The empress, unaware of the ramifications, gave her consent. When the
banquet was at its height Liu Chang poured wine for the empress and
asked permission to sing a folk song that he learned as a child. The
empress gave her permission and Liu Chang began to recite:
         Deep we plough and thick we sow the seed,
         We set out the little plants where they will have room to grow.
         Whatever comes up that is not from our seed,
         We hoe it out and throw it away!
The empress was outraged at the obvious allusion, but she could say
nothing without admitting her resemblance to it. Later a member of the
entourage became drunk and slipped away from the party without
seeking permission from the empress.
Liu Chang followed the man and drew his sword and slew him. Liu
Chang returned to the party carrying the severed head and said to the
startled guests, "Some man tried to desert the banquet! In accordance
with army regulations I have duly carried out the penalty of execution!"
The empress and her courtiers were completely dumbfounded, but
since the empress had given permission to conduct the service
according to military protocol, no one could find fault with Liu's
actions.
Thereafter Liu Chang was treated with great deference by the court.
Shortly after empress Lu passed away, the Liu clan revolted and in
keeping with the song wiped out the entire Lu clan, except for one
princess who was married to a marquis in a distant province.
                                                                      127
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Summary
A rule of leadership states to always reward in public but to criticize in
private. However, there are times when others need to see the possible
consequences of their behavior by making an example of someone.
128
                                 Feign Madness, But Keep Your Balance
                          Jiǎ Chī Bù Diān
                              Strategy 27
          Feign Madness, But Keep Your Balance
     It is the gnarled and crooked tree that escapes the
     woodsman's axe.
     Lao Zi, The Tao Te Ching
     When an eagle is about to attack, it will fly low and draw in
     its wings. When a fierce cat is about to strike, it will fold back
     its ears and crouch low. When the Sage is about to move, he
     will certainly display a stupid countenance.
     The Six Secret Teachings Of The Tai Gong
Hide behind the mask of a fool, a drunk, or a madman to create
confusion about your intentions and motivations. Lure your opponent
into underestimating your ability until, overconfident, he drops his
guard. Then you may attack.
                                                                        129
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Warring States Period China
Sun Bin was making a reputation for himself after graduating from the
mysterious Ghost Valley School when he was invited to become an
advisor to the king of Wei. 20 Another advisor at the court, Pang Juan,
became jealous of Sun Bin's increasing popularity with the king and
devised a scheme to frame Sun as a traitor. He convinced Sun that he
should write to his family and plan a return trip home to show off his
success.
Sun was concerned about taking a leave from the court so soon after his
appointment, but Pang reassured him that this was customary in Wei.
Sun complied and wrote a letter to his family announcing his
forthcoming visit. Pang had the letter intercepted and brought it to the
king explaining that, since Sun had only spent three months at court,
his imminent return could only mean that he was a spy and was
planning to return with state secrets.
The king was outraged and he had Sun imprisoned and the tendons
behind his knees cut, hence Sun's first name Bin, meaning "crippled."
A year later, Sun heard that an emissary from his home state would be
visiting Wei, and he planned to escape.
First, he feigned madness to relax the guard's vigil. He rubbed his own
feces over his body and alternately screamed and wept, and then
convulsed with laughter. Pang suspected this to be an act and so he
tested him by placing a bowl of food and a bowl of feces through the
bars. Sun ignored the delicious food and ate the contents of the other
bowl instead.
Convinced Sun had truly gone insane, Pang and the prison guards soon
forgot about the "mad" prisoner. When the embassy from Yue arrived,
20 Probably the most famous of the many rustic ‘academies’ that have existed
in China since ancient times to train men in the arts of war. Typically these
schools taught strategy, diplomacy, and martial arts. A tradition that Guigu
Xiansheng (The Sage of Ghost Valley) was the teacher of renowned Warring
States generals Sun Bin and Pang Juan is also considered to be a late
confabulation.
130
                                  Feign Madness, But Keep Your Balance
they received a secret message detailing Sun's plight. Determined to
rescue their fellow countryman they sought permission to visit with the
famous but now insane strategist.
The king gave his consent and, since the guards paid little attention,
they were able to switch Sun for a double who volunteered to take his
place. Sun was secretly spirited back to Yue where he went on to
conquer Wei and kill Pang Juan using another famous tactic. (see
Chapter 28)
Sui Dynasty China
During the final years of Emperor Yang of the Sui dynasty, there
appeared a ballad that foretold the fall of the house of Sui and the
ascent of a man named Li as emperor. The ballad became immensely
popular among the disaffected subjects of Emperor Yang's infamous
rule.
The emperor, being superstitious and believing in the prophesy himself,
began a campaign to search out and execute anyone of importance with
the surname Li. He had numerous ministers and officials along with
their entire families put to the sword.
A minor official by the name of Li Yuan was serving as superintendent
in the provinces when he was summoned to the court. Li Yuan delayed
appearing in court by claiming poor health.
Li Yuan had a niece who was a palace maid. One day the emperor
asked her where her uncle Li had been. The lady replied that her uncle
was ill. The emperor said, "I wonder if he is courting death?"
When Li Yuan got word of this, he was certain that if he obeyed the
summons to court he would never return. Thereupon he feigned
madness and pretended to become an incorrigible drunk. When the
imperial spies reported Li's behavior the emperor thought that a
madmen could never fulfill the prophesy and was no longer suspicious
of Li.
Surprisingly, two years later the Sui emperor placed Li in charge of a
field army to defend the empire against barbarian incursions. Li fought
                                                                    131
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
bravely, won the respect of his troops, marched on the capital, and went
on to found the illustrious Tang dynasty, thus fulfilling the prophecy.
Ming Dynasty China
Just before his death in 1398, the founder of the Ming dynasty, Hongwu,
bequeathed that the throne be passed over his sons to his grandson
Huidi. Only sixteen when he was appointed emperor, Huidi was
counseled by treacherous advisors to eliminate the other branches of
the family. One by one, the young emperor's uncles were summoned to
court to answer to charges of corruption. Always found guilty, they
were stripped of their rank, reduced to the status of commoner, and
exiled to a remote district.
One of the uncles, the prince of Shang, refused the summons and, in
protest, set fire to his palace, burning his family to death. Then,
mounting his terrified horse, he charged into the fire to his meet his
own death.
A year later, five of the princes had been eliminated, leaving only one
uncle that still retained position in the government: the prince of Yan.
The prince was alone and isolated, waiting for the inevitable summons
to court which he could not refuse since, in keeping with tradition, his
own sons were held as hostages in the capital. To give himself time to
plan a way of saving himself, he feigned madness.
He ran through the streets of Beijing screaming and yelling, stealing
food and wine, and sleeping in gutters. For days he sank into deep
depressions and would see no one. In warm weather he sat by the stove,
shivering and complaining of the cold.
But it was all a smoke screen meant to deceive the emperor. When the
emperor heard these reports he said, "Alas, my poor uncle has gone
truly insane. Let us release his sons to him in the hope that they may
bring him back to reason."
This was the young emperor's fatal mistake. With his sons' safe, the
prince of Yan was free to openly challenge the emperor's authority.
132
                                 Feign Madness, But Keep Your Balance
He raised an army and by 1402 the young emperor was dead and the
prince of Yan assumed the throne as Emperor Yongle, one of the Ming
dynasty's greatest rulers.
Summary
It is well known that the strongest contender in any sphere of activity
automatically fears, and therefore becomes an enemy to the second
strongest. To hide your strength, feign madness since without the
power of rational thought, all other powers are useless. When you cease
being a threat, hostile attentions will be focused on the next most
powerful. This buys you time to scheme for victory.
                                                                    133
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
134
        Lure Your Enemy Onto The Roof, Then Take Away The Ladder
                        Shàng Wū Chōu Tī
                              Strategy 28
             Lure Your Enemy Onto The Roof,
                Then Take Away The Ladder
     Avoid terrain that features cliffs and crags, narrow passes,
     tangled bush, and quagmires. While avoiding such places
     ourselves, try to lure the enemy into such areas so that when
     we attack the enemy will have this type of terrain at his rear.
     Sun Zi, The Art of War
With baits and deceptions, lure your enemy into treacherous terrain.
Then cut off his lines of communication and avenue of escape. To save
himself he must fight both your own forces and the elements of nature.
Warring States Period China
In 341 B.C., Wei was attacking Han, which in turn appealed to Qi for
assistance. The king of Qi sought the advice of Sun Bin who
recommended waiting until both armies were exhausted before
intervening. To insure Han would put up a good defense, Sun sent
                                                                     135
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
messengers saying that an army was being readied and would be there
at the first opportunity. After several weeks, reports came in that both
armies were weary of the siege and Sun again set out for the capital of
Wei, an apparent repeat of his earlier strategy ‘Besiege Wei to Rescue
Chao’. (See Chapter 2)
When the general of Wei, Pang Juan, heard that Sun had crossed into
Wei he was furious. He then sent his army to catch up with them before
they reached the capital. This time Pang was not going to allow himself
to be ambushed, so he sent scouting parties well ahead of the main
army.
Having outfoxed Pang twice before, Sun's generals wondered how they
could bait him into another trap.
Sun said, "I know Pang Juan has a low opinion of the Qi soldiers and
believes them to be cowards. We will allow him to believe this."
Sun ordered that when his men encamped the first night they build one
fire for every man, and on the next night, one fire for every two men,
and on the third night, one fire for every three men.
When Pang was within a few days march of the Qi forces, he
questioned his scouts who had been spying on the Qi army since it
entered their territory. They reported that on the first night one hundred
thousand fires were lit, on the second night only fifty thousand fires
were lit, and on the third night, only thirty thousand fires had been lit.
Pang concluded that the deeper the Qi army penetrated Wei territory,
the more their men became frightened and deserted.
"They have heard I am here and they are fleeing in fear of my
presence," declared Pang.
One of his advisors was not so convinced and warned, "But the men of
Qi are notorious for their trickery we should be careful before pursuing
them recklessly."
However, Pang did not heed his advice. Meanwhile Sun found the
perfect terrain to stage an ambush: a stretch of road that was flanked by
hills and woods. In these woods, he concealed his archers and, at the
136
        Lure Your Enemy Onto The Roof, Then Take Away The Ladder
entrance of the valley, he had them build a rough defensive barrier.
About seven hundred yards further along the trail there was a large oak
tree. Sun peeled off the tree's bark and wrote in large characters: "Pang
Juan will die here."
He gave instructions that the archers should lie in wait throughout the
night and, when they saw a light appear near the tree, shoot towards the
light.
As expected, Pang arrived at the entrance of the valley shortly after
dark and first encountered the defensive obstruction. He laughed telling
his men this was but a desperate trick of a fleeing enemy. He ordered
the barrier torn down and was proceeding along the road when a scout
reported that something had been written on a tree up ahead. Pang went
to investigate for himself. He ordered a torch brought up so that he
could better read the characters.
When the light of the torch shone on the tree, Sun's hidden archers
rained five thousand arrows towards it killing everyone in the vanguard
and wounding Pang Juan. Knowing he was beaten, Pang cut his own
throat. His last words were, “That upstart. Now with my death I've
made his reputation!” And it did. Sun Bin went on to write a famous
book on strategy called, THE ART OF WARFARE. The book was lost
for almost two thousand years until recently rediscovered in a Han
dynasty tomb.
Han Dynasty China
After defeating the rebel kingdom of Wei, the famous Han general Han
Xin was sent to quell the other two kingdoms that had revolted, Qi and
Chu. General Han set out towards Qi, but Chu sent its general, Long
Chu, with a force of two hundred thousand men to intercept Han's
invasion of Qi.
The two armies met on opposite sides of the Wei River. General Han
ordered his men to fill over ten thousand sandbags and carry them up-
river to dam the flow of water.
                                                                      137
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
The next morning General Han led his army across the lowered river
and attacked Chu, but after a short engagement pretended defeat and
fled back across the river.
General Long announced, "See, I always knew Han Xin was a coward!"
and he led his army across the river in pursuit.
Through a prearranged signal, General Han had his men break the dam
and free the pent-up waters. Only half of the Chu army was across the
river when the flood cut the army in half, drowning those caught
midstream.
General Han then wheeled around his retreating forces and attacked the
advance guard of Chu, killing General Long Chu.
The remaining troops panicked and fled in all directions, but in the end
were captured by the pursuing Han soldiers.
Sui Dynasty China
In A.D. 910 King Zhuangzong of Jin,' the future Tang emperor, set out
to rescue the ally state of Zhou from the invading Liang forces. The Jin
forces were outnumbered by the Liang, but they had more cavalry,
while the Liang army consisted of mostly infantry and new recruits.
The Liang set up defensive fortifications along the river in wooded
terrain flanked by marshes and awaited the Jin.
The Jin army was far from base and supplies were thin. King Chuang
needed to fight a decisive battle quickly or risk being starved into
submission, but General Zhou warned against a frontal attack on the
Liang.
He said, "The people of Liang excel at fighting from fortified defense
and are not adept at open field combat, while our own strength lies
with our cavalry.
Now cavalry are adept at warfare on open plains and expansive wilds,
but our army is encamped in wetlands and forest. This is hardly terrain
that would be advantageous to us.
138
        Lure Your Enemy Onto The Roof, Then Take Away The Ladder
It would be better to withdraw the army to Haoyi and thereby entice the
enemy to leave their encampment."
The king agreed and they withdrew the army. Then General Zhou led a
thousand cavalry to provoke skirmishes with Liang's encampment.
Enraged, the Liang came forth with all their troops and fought running
battles with General Zhou that eventually stretched several dozen miles.
General Zhou and King Chuang watched the battle from the top of a
nearby hill.
The king said, "The Liang have been lured onto level plains and
shallow grass. Our cavalry can advance and withdraw unhindered.
Truly this is terrain where we can wrest victory."
He ordered General Zhou to attack, but the general replied, "Without
any preparation Liang's forces hastily came forth and have now
traveled far. Moreover, they certainly did not have any time to prepare
rations.
Even if they did, they would not have had the leisure to eat them. By
midday, their men will be hungry and thirsty, and their army will
certainly withdraw. If we attack them while they are withdrawing, we
will inevitably be victorious."
By late afternoon, the Liang forces were seen pulling back. General
Zhou ordered the beating of the drums, and with a tumultuous clamor
advanced to attack. Exhausted and cut off from supplies, the Liang
forces suffered a serious defeat.
Summary
Every type of terrain can provide both an advantage for one form of
warfare while a hindrance for another. A large force has the advantage
in open terrain, while it is hindered by the narrow. But a small force is
vulnerable in open spaces, yet protected by the narrow. Therefore, the
key is to lure your enemy onto a terrain that hinders his abilities while
helping your own.
                                                                     139
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
140
                                    Tie Silk Blossoms To The Dead Tree
                       Shù Shàng Kāi Huā
                             Strategy 29
           Tie Silk Blossoms To The Dead Tree
     Spreading out pennants and making the flags conspicuous
     are the means by which to cause doubt in the enemy.
     Analytically positioning the fences and screens is the means
     by which to bedazzle and make the enemy doubtful.
     Sun Bin, Art of Warfare
Tying silk blossoms on a dead tree gives the illusion that the tree is
healthy. Through the use of artifice and disguise make something of no
value appear valuable; of no threat appear dangerous; of no use, useful.
Han Dynasty China
During the later Han dynasty, the Qiang barbarians revolted and
invaded Han territory. The empress Dowager Teng appointed General
Yu Xu to raise an army and drive out the barbarians.
                                                                     141
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
The Qiang led several thousand troops to occupy the strategic pass of
Yaoku to await the Han. Outnumbered, General Yu halted his army
some distance from the pass and publicly announced that he would wait
until reinforcements arrived before venturing any further. When the
Qiang heard this, they relaxed their formations and divided up into
raiding parties to plunder the local countryside.
Taking advantage of their scattering, General Yu broke through the
pass and advanced at double the normal speed covering more than a
hundred li a day. The Qiang regrouped to give chase, but the Han
already had a day's head start on them.
General Yu sought to dissuade the Qiang from attacking. On the first
night, he ordered his soldiers to light one cooking fire for every man.
On the second night each man was to light two cooking fires, and on
the third, three. Seeing that the number of cooking fires increased each
night, the Qiang did not dare to attack.
Someone asked, "Sun Bin reduced his cooking fires but you increased
them (see Chapter 28). Furthermore, according to THE ART OF WAR,
an army on the march should not exceed thirty li a day, yet today you
have advanced a hundred. Why is this?"
Yu replied, "The enemy troops are numerous while our soldiers are few.
When the barbarians see our fires increasing each day they will
certainly interpret it as evidence that reinforcements from the garrison
are joining us.
Believing that our numbers are many while our speed is quick, they will
hesitate to pursue us. Sun Bin manifested weakness, but I now display
strength because our relative strategic power is different."
The Qiang became ever more wary of engaging in battle and finally
decided to disperse and return to their homelands. It was then that
General Yu turned about and pursued the retreating barbarians
inflicting severe causalities and driving them out of the territory.
142
                                    Tie Silk Blossoms To The Dead Tree
Three Kingdoms Period China
Duke Zhou Yu asked assistance from Liu Bei in his plans for attacking
their mutual enemy Cao Cao. Liu Bei lent the duke the famous
strategist Kong Ming to assist with his planning.
The duke however became miffed with Kong Ming because of his
outspoken and usually contrary opinions.
The duke wanted to execute him but another minister, Lu Su,
intervened and said that they could not outright execute an advisor
without just cause, as this would destroy their alliance with Liu Bei.
The duke conceded and decided to set up Kong Ming for a failure, after
which, Kong would be forced to commit suicide.
The duke called all his generals to counsel. In front of these witnesses
the duke turned to Kong and asked, "Renowned advisor, in several days
Cao Cao will arrive and we will do battle along the river and its
environs, what do you believe to be the most important weapon for
such an engagement?"
Kong Ming replied, "For river combat, the bow and arrow are the most
important."
"I cannot agree with you more," said the duke. "But we are in short
supply, I wonder then if you will oversee the production of one hundred
thousand arrows to be delivered within ten days."
Kong Ming sensed the trap. To produce ten thousand arrows a day was
a near impossible task, should he fail to produce the arrows within the
appointed time he would be forced to commit suicide. Not to be
outdone however he replied, "Cao Cao's forces may arrive any day, ten
days is too long to wait, instead I shall deliver the arrows within three
days."
The duke and his advisor Lu Su couldn't believe their luck for surely
Kong Ming would fail to do in three days what was nearly impossible
to do in ten.
                                                                      143
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
The next day Kong Ming did nothing but relax and stroll about the
parks. The duke seeing this was impressed with Kong's dispassionate
resolve to die, since it seemed he was not even trying to fulfill his
promise.
The second day Kong Ming secretly borrowed twenty river junks and
had them outfitted by lining the hull, cabin walls, and gunwales with
hundreds of bundles of straw.
Before daybreak on the third day, Kong Ming had the junks chained
together. He woke up Lu Su and asked if he wished to accompany him
as he went to pick up his shipment of one hundred thousand arrows. Lu
Su, curious to see this for himself, agreed to go along.
In the morning fog, the ships slowly made their way up-river towards
the encampment of Cao Cao. As the junks neared the camp, they
suddenly became visible to the startled Wei guards. They immediately
alerted Cao Cao who, suspecting a surprise attack, ordered all his
archers to rain arrows at the approaching fleet.
As the junks made their way up past the enemy encampment the
bundles of straw facing the enemy camp were filled with arrows. Kong
Ming then turned the ships around and filled the other side with arrows
as well before disappearing back into the fog. Cao Cao, fearing a trap,
refused to let his naval commanders go after the retreating junks.
When the junks returned to base the arrows collected exceeded more
than one hundred thousand. When Lu Su made his report the duke said,
"Alas, this man is superior to me." Kong Ming later became prime
minister under the duke.
Three Kingdoms Period China
During the final years of the Three Kingdoms, Sima Yan usurped the
throne of Wei, made himself king, and changed the name of the
kingdom from Wei to Jin. News of this reached the neighboring king of
Wu who knew that his kingdom would be the next likely target of the
ambitious Sima. He worried so much that he died several days later.
144
                                     Tie Silk Blossoms To The Dead Tree
Sun Hao then inherited the throne of Wu and immediately took to
pleasure and vice, neglecting state affairs. Over the next few years, the
new king of Wu grew increasingly paranoid and had dozens of his
advisors and commanders and their entire families executed on the
slightest suspicion. As a result, he was widely reviled.
Hearing that the people of Wu despised their king, Sima ordered a
naval attack led by Commander Wang Chun. The king of Wu had no
idea of what to do against the impending naval attack. He convened
what remained of his council and one advisor recommended stringing a
bamboo barrier across the river to prevent the fleet from reaching the
Wu capital of Jian Ye. The king agreed and heavy bamboo cords were
made and strung just below the surface.
When Commander Wang heard about the barrier he laughed. He
ordered his men to build huge rafts from timbers on which were erected
straw dummies dressed in armor and holding weapons. The dummies
were soaked in oil and a trip mechanism was attached that would ignite
the dummies when the rafts struck the barrier.
The rafts burned through the bamboo and continued on downstream to
the Wu capital. The spectacle of a fleet of rafts full of burning men so
frightened the Wu troops, they fled in terror.
Sima captured Wu and went on to found the short-lived Jin dynasty.
Summary
While it is important to learn of your enemy's plans, it is equally
important to conceal your own. Through the use of props, facades, and
camouflage, you keep the enemy in doubt of your strengths and
weaknesses. Not knowing where to attack, the enemy is led to defeat.
                                                                     145
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
146
                           Exchange The Role Of Guest For That Of Host
                           Fǎn Kè Wéi Zhǔ
                              Strategy 30
     Exchange The Role Of Guest For That Of Host
     The strategists have a saying: I dare not play the host, but
     play the guest, I dare not advance an inch, but retreat a foot
     instead. This is known as marching forward when there is no
     road, rolling up ones sleeve when there is no arm, dragging
     ones adversary by force when there is no adversary, and
     taking up arms when there are no arms.
     Lao Zi, The Tao Te Ching
Defeat the enemy from within by infiltrating the enemy's camp under
the guise of cooperation, surrender, or peace treaties. In this way, you
can discover his weakness and then, when the enemy's guard is relaxed,
strike directly at the source of his strength.
Qin Dynasty China
Xiang Liang came from a long line of Chu generals but the family lost
power when the state of Chu was defeated and annexed by Qin. In his
                                                                     147
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
youth he had killed a man and escaped with his nephew Xiang Yu to the
state of Wu requesting asylum from the governor. The governor
welcomed Xiang Liang and gave him an administrative position.
During this time, Xiang secretly formed a band of guests and retainers
and trained them in the art of war while establishing a reputation as a
competent leader. Then in 209 B.C., the various states and kingdoms
rose up in open revolt against the oppressive Qin dynasty. When word
of the revolt reached Wu, the governor saw an opportunity to improve
his position by joining the rebellion.
He called Xiang Liang and said, "All regions west of the Yangtze River
are in revolt. The time has come when heaven will destroy the house of
Qin.
I have heard it said that "He who takes the lead may rule others, but he
who lags behind will be ruled by others." I would like to dispatch an
army with you and your nephew at the head."
Xiang Liang, who took the advice in a way the governor would regret,
said, "This is a great honor you have bestowed on my family and I beg
leave to call in my nephew Yu, so that he may receive your orders
directly."
The governor consented. Xiang Liang went to summon his nephew and
secretly gave him instructions to hold his sword in readiness. They
returned to the governor and after some time Xiang Liang turned to his
nephew and said, "You may proceed!"
This was the signal, and without hesitation Yu drew his sword and cut
off the governor's head in a single stroke. Xiang Liang then picked up
the head, removed the governor's seals of office, and declared himself
governor.
The few attendants that objected were quickly attacked and killed by
Yu so that no one else dared to oppose the appointment. Xiang Liang
went on to rally several armies to his side in revolt against the Qin.
148
                            Exchange The Role Of Guest For That Of Host
After numerous victories he re-conquered his home state of Chu and
became a contender for the emperor's throne before being killed in
battle against another rival for the empire.
Han Dynasty China
In 180 B.C. empress Lu, the wife of the first Han emperor, passed away.
For years after her husband's death she had held power, supplanting the
authority of the late emperor's Liu clan with her own family, the Lu.
Upon her death the Liu family plotted to reclaim their control over the
empire.
One of the few remaining members of the Liu clan who had escaped
the empress's purge still held a high position as the king of Qi. He
received a secret message asking him to raise his troops and march on
the capital of Chang'an where he would be assisted by other Liu
supporters from within.
The king of Qi ordered his general, Wei Po, to secretly ready the army
for mobilization, but the prime minister of Qi (a member of the Lu clan)
learned of the king's intentions. He intercepted the general's orders and,
using the imperial seals in his possession, ordered the army to surround
the king's palace and keep him prisoner until further instructions
arrived from the capital.21
General Wei Po went to speak with the prime minister, pretending that
he had no involvement or knowledge of the king's plot, and said, "Even
though the king wants to send out his troops, he cannot since he does
not possess the Tiger Seals22 of the Han court which would give him
authority to do so. I beg you allow me to take command of the troops
for you and keep the king under guard!"
21 The prime minister was appointed by the court, to watch over the conductof
the king.
22 These small cast bronze figurines of a tiger were split into two pieces.
‘male and female’ that fit together to make a whole. The king would keep one
half and his commanders the other. A courier bearing orders would be given
the king’s half. A commander, upon receiving the orders, would check that the
couriers’ half and hist own fit together thus insuring the orders were genuine.
                                                                             149
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
The prime minister, believing that Wei Po was on his side, handed over
the seals, and put him in charge of the troops. But as soon as he had
taken command, Wei Po had the troops surround the prime minister's
offices instead.
"Alas!" said the prime minister. 'The Daoists have a saying: 'Strike
when the hour comes, or suffer the ruin that follows." This then is what
they meant!"
The prime minister then committed suicide. The remaining members of
the Liu clan rose up in revolt and destroyed the entire Lu family.
Ming Dynasty China
During the Ming dynasty, in the Songjiang region, there lived a wealthy
man known as Rich Man Pan. As rich as Pan was, he was always
hungry for more and sought out every opportunity to make money.
Having heard about alchemy Pan became obsessed with the idea of
turning lead into gold and went to great expense inviting wandering
sages and alchemists to his house to teach him the secret. Yet after
more than ten years of experiments, Pan was still unable to convert
even a gram of lead into gold.
Meanwhile, Pan's interest in alchemy became known far and wide. One
year Pan went on vacation in the luxurious resort town of West Lake
just outside of Hangzhao. Pan's villa was large and sumptuous, but next
door was an even grander villa. Over the weeks, Pan observed his
neighbor who appeared to be fabulously wealthy and who was
accompanied by a stunningly attractive young woman. Pan contrived to
meet this elegant stranger, and over the weeks they became acquainted.
The man's name was Jia Wuzhi and Pan was anxious to find out the
source of his wealth. After discreet questioning, Jia told Pan that he
was an alchemist. Pan was stunned and told him of his own efforts in
that field. Pan doubted that it was possible after all, but Jia chided his
lack of faith and as a matter of honor offered to demonstrate his
technique.
He brought out a tripod which he set over a fire. Cradled on the tripod
was a porcelain dish containing what appeared to be common lead. Jia
150
                           Exchange The Role Of Guest For That Of Host
heated the dish until the lead melted then, removing a silk bag from his
person, he scooped out a small amount of black powder and mixed this
with the molten lead. The lead instantly transformed into valuable
silver.
Pan was astonished and asked him how it was done. Jia explained that
the process was long and costly but once the powder, called the "silver
breeder," was produced, it would transform enough lead into silver to
make Pan the wealthiest man in China. Pan explained that he already
had a laboratory set up at his home and he begged Jia to be his guest
there and help him to create the silver breeder.
"Well, since you have already studied the art yourself, it may be all
right. But be warned that the rules are strict and I will only show you
the process once." said the alchemist.
When Jia and his beautiful wife arrived, Pan was stricken by the
woman's beauty. Jia explained that the more silver used, the greater the
potency, so Pan bought as much silver as he could get hold of, over
four thousand Taels. The next day they began. Jia explained that the
process was one of purification and refinement and that both he and
Pan must wash, fast, and avoid any activity that was impure. Most
important, only he and Pan could enter the sacred area to attend the fire.
But, in case of emergency, Jia's wife could substitute since she was
specially trained for this job.
The process would take eighty-one days to complete. Pan was warned
not to look into the covered cauldron before the final day. A few days
later a message arrived informing Jia that his mother was ill and that
she requested his presence at her deathbed. Jia explained the situation
to Pan who was deeply concerned about the silver breeder, but Jia
reassured him saying he would leave his wife behind to oversee the
process.
After Jia left, Pan grew ever more lustful for the alchemist's wife. One
night in a fit of passion he seduced her in the sacred chamber. On the
eighty first day, Jia returned and he and Pan went to inspect the boiler,
but as soon as Jia opened the lid his facial expression turned to anger.
                                                                       151
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
"What has happened to the silver breeder?" he shouted. "Has anyone
done anything here that could have affected the purity of the
atmosphere?"
Pan was shocked into silence. The alchemist summoned his wife and
angrily asked her if anything had occurred in the room while he was
gone. At first, she denied everything, but after Jia grabbed a whip and
threatened to beat her with it she confessed to the seduction.
Jia was furious, he turned to Pan and said, "You greedy scoundrel! With
all your money you could buy as many wives as you want, but you still
wanted to defile my wife. Well, you have your just reward since the
silver breeder has all evaporated. And I will never show you the secret
now."
Whereupon the alchemist and his wife left, ignoring Pan's pleas for
forgiveness.
Two years later the still brooding, Pan returned to the West Lake area,
but under more modest conditions. There, one day he spotted a woman
who looked like the alchemist's wife. He questioned her and she did
indeed recognize him.
Pan asked about her husband and the woman replied, "Oh, I was never
married. I was hired for three months to pretend to be the wife of an
alchemist, but now I am working for another alchemist who is at this
moment meeting with his new client."
Japanese Folk Tale
In feudal Japan, there lived a venerable kendo master who decided to
test his three highest ranking students. He brought them one by one to
an old temple in the nearby mountains where he told each student, "You
have studied with me many years, now let's see if my teaching has been
in vain. There, within the temple, awaits your test. Pass and you will
have graduated."
Within the dimly lit temple, the Master had hidden four samurai armed
with clubs and instructions to jump anyone who entered the temple.
152
                           Exchange The Role Of Guest For That Of Host
The first student entered the temple and, before his eyes could adjust to
the light, he was surprised and beaten by the samurai.
"I am sorry, you have failed," said the master.
The second student entered the temple and sensed the attackers. He was
able to deftly evade their attack and defeat them. The student came out
of the temple triumphant, but again the master said, "I am sorry, you
have failed."
Finally, the third student was brought to the temple and told about the
test. The student replied, "But venerable master, protocol dictates that
when entering a temple the master must always precede the student, so
if you please, I shall follow you in."
To which the master replied, "You rascal! You have learned all I can
teach you."
Summary
When you are weak but your enemy is strong there is no chance for
victory in a direct contest. Instead, by assuming a subordinate position,
you may have the chance of undermining and subverting your enemy's
power.
                                                                      153
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
154
                                       The Strategy Of Beautiful Women
                              Měi Rén Jì
                             Strategy 31
             The Strategy Of Beautiful Women
     Increase the enemy's excesses, seize what he loves. Then we,
     acting from without, can cause a response from within.
     Sima Fa, Seven Military Classics
     Assist the enemy in his licentiousness and indulgence in
     music in order to dissipate his will. Make him generous gifts
     of pearls, and jade, and ply him with beautiful women.
     The Six Secret Teachings of the Tai Gong
Send your enemy beautiful women to cause discord within his camp.
This strategy can work on three levels. First, the ruler becomes so
enamored with the beauty that he neglects his duties and allows his
vigilance to wane. Second, other males at court will begin to display
aggressive behavior, which inflames minor differences, hinders
cooperation, and destroys morale. Third, other females at court,
                                                                   155
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
motivated by jealousy and envy, begin to plot intrigues, further
exasperating the situation.
Warring States Period China
A wandering strategist by the name of Chang Yi traveled to Chu in
search of employment. By the time he arrived, he was reduced to
poverty. His attendant became angry and wanted to go back.
Chang Yi said, "So you are dissatisfied wearing rags and you wish to
return, but wait until I have had an audience with the king and see then
if our fortunes have not changed."
The next day Chang Yi had an audience with the king who told him he
had no need for another advisor, to which Chang Yi replied, "Since
your majesty has no need for my services will he permit me to travel to
Jin to seek employment there?"
"Granted," said the king.
Chang Yi said, "Is there anything that I can procure for the king while I
am in Jin?"
The king sneered and said, "Gold, pearls, gems, rhinoceros horn, and
ivory are all available here. What does Jin have that I could possibly
want?"
"Ah, so the king is not interested in beautiful women?"
"Why do you say that?"
"Because the women of Jin are renowned for their beauty and grace.
Those who see them for the first time believe them to be goddesses."
"Well, if this is true we would be most interested in seeing such
beauties."
Having said that, the king provided Chang Yi with pearls and jade with
which to purchase a few girls.
156
                                        The Strategy Of Beautiful Women
At that time the king's two favorite wives, Queen Nan and the
concubine Zheng Xiu, heard about Chang Yi's mission to Jin and were
very much afraid. They both sent agents to him, each bearing five
hundred catties of gold and a letter which read, "We have heard of your
mission to Jin and have sent you a thousand catties of gold that you
may use to cover the costs of your journey."
The next day before Chang Yi was to depart he went to the king to say
his farewell. Chang Yi asked permission to offer a toast to his majesty
and the king agreed. After the first toast Chang Yi said, "Is there no
one who can join us in a toast to your majesty's health?"
"If you wish, I will call in my favorites to join us," replied the king, and
he summoned Queen Nan and Zheng Xiu.
When they entered the room, Chang Yi took one look and then
prostrated himself before the king saying, "I have committed a mortal
offense against your Majesty."
"How so?" asked the king.
"I have traveled throughout the empire and seen countless beauties, but
never have I seen two women as beautiful as these. So, when I said I
would get our Majesty real beauties, I unintentionally deceived you."
"You are pardoned," said the king. "I always felt that in all the empire
there were no women as beautiful as these."
The king allowed Chang Yi to keep the money he gave him and, along
with the gold given by the king's women, Chang Yi became quite
wealthy and found a suitable appointment with another king.
Han Dynasty China
In 199 B.C. the Han emperor, Gaozu, personally led his army against
the invading Xiongnu. The emperor, however, was no match against
the cunning tribesmen and he was led into a trap and suffered heavy
losses (see Chapter 15). He and his remaining forces retreated to the
city of Pingcheng for refuge, but were surrounded by some three
hundred thousand horsemen.
                                                                         157
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
There the emperor remained surrounded for seven days with no
possibility of bringing in either provisions or reinforcements. The
emperor thought there was nothing left to do but surrender when his
advisor, Chen Ping, came up with another strategy.
Chen had a painting made of a beautiful Chinese princess which he
secretly delivered to the wife of the Xiongnu commander. Along with
the painting he sent a message that read, "My emperor intends to
surrender to your husband, and so, to win his favor he is sending him a
present of one of China's famous beauties to be his concubine."
When the Xiongnu commander's wife saw the painting and read the
note she was mad with jealousy. Fearing that such a beautiful rival
would steal her husband's affections, she persuaded her husband to lift
the siege and return home.
The next morning when the emperor awoke he discovered the Xiongnu
had left and he was able to return safely to his capital.
Three Kingdoms Period China
The last Han emperor was under the dominion of the powerful warlord
of Wei, Dong Zhuo. He was a ruthless man who was in the habit of
executing senior ministers and officials if they should disagree with his
opinions. The governor of Wei, Wang Yun, knew it was only a matter
of time before his head was on the chopping block as well. He spent
many sleepless nights wondering how to rid the kingdom of this tyrant.
One night he was approached by his household sing-song girl known as
Sable Cicada who offered to help Wang bring down the tyrant Dong.
Wang was touched by the girl's sincerity and agreed to use her in the
Strategy of Beautiful Women. Now, it so happened that Dong Zhuo's
second in command was a young and valiant warrior by the name of Lu
Bu. Dong had adopted the popular commander as his son as a means of
sealing both the youth's, and the army's loyalty.
One day, Wang invited Lu Bu to a gracious feast at his villa where he
was wined, dined, and entertained by dancers and singers. As the
evening progressed, Wang called for another pot of wine that was
158
                                       The Strategy Of Beautiful Women
brought in and served by the stunning Sable Cicada. The more Lu Bu
drank, the more enamored he became with Sable, until he asked his
host who she was.
Wang told him Sable was his niece and if the commander so desired, he
could have her as his wife. Lu Bu was most grateful and Wang assured
him that he would arrange a day for the wedding and send Sable to him
at his palace.
A few days later Wang invited the warlord Dong Zhuo to his villa for
dinner and entertainment. After they had drunk several pots of wine,
the beautiful Sable was brought out to dance. Dong Zhuo was infamous
for his sexual appetite and the instant he saw Sable he was stricken with
desire. Wang, seeming to notice the general's interest, offered him his
"little household maid" to be his concubine. The general happily
accepted the offer and carried Sable off in his carriage that very night.
The next morning Lu Bu visited Wang to inquire about Sable. Wang
told him the terrible news that Dong Zhuo, hearing of Lu Bu's
impending marriage to his niece, came over to see if she met with his
approval. Upon seeing how beautiful she was, he took her for himself.
Wang pitifully explained that he was in no position to refuse the desires
of such a powerful warlord.
Lu Bu was enraged and secretly went to visit Sable at Dong's palace.
Sable confirmed Wang's story, and said that, although she loved Lu Bu
and hated the old tyrant, there was nothing she could do.
Lu Bu continued to secretly visit Sable over several weeks. By this time
Dong Zhuo, who was also completely taken with Sable, started to have
suspicions about the constant presence of his second-in-command.
One day he happened upon the two of them talking in the garden and in
a fit of jealousy chased Lu Bu with a spear. When he questioned Sable
about what was going on, she told him that Lu Bu had been pestering
her for weeks and was about to rape her when he arrived in time to
chase him away. Dong Zhuo wanted to execute Lu Bu immediately, but
his senior minister intervened saying that to do so would undermine the
already shaky morale of the army. So, Dong delayed the order.
                                                                       159
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Lu Bu was sulking in the woods when he happened upon Wang Yun.
He told Wang the terrible sequence of events and Wang replied that
truly Dong Zhuo was a tyrant and a traitor to the emperor for usurping
his power. Together they plotted his assassination.
They forged an invitation from the emperor for Dong Zhuo to visit the
capital where they prepared a trap. Upon entering the emperor's palace
Dong had to present his weapons to the gatekeeper.
Once inside the palace he was attacked and killed by Lu Bu and his
men. Lu Bu then assumed the title of General, had Dong's property
confiscated, and every Dong family member executed.
Lu Bu married Sable who was a good wife to him.
Summary
The power of a beautiful woman is her ability to arouse intense feelings
in those around her. Lust, jealousy, envy, and hatred are powerful
emotions that create an atmosphere in which rational thought becomes
impossible. This is psychological warfare at its most insidious.
160
                                           The Strategy Of Open City Gates
                             Kōng Chéng Jì
                               Strategy 32
               The Strategy Of Open City Gates
      One who excels as a war, does not appear formidable; One
      who excels in defeating the enemy does not join issue. This is
      known as the virtue of non-contention.
      Lao Zi, Tao Te Ching
When the enemy is superior in numbers and your situation is such that
you expect to be overrun at any moment, then drop all pretense of
military preparedness and act casually.
Unless the enemy has an accurate description of your situation, this
unusual behavior will arouse suspicions. With luck he will be
dissuaded from attacking. 23
23 This is the strategy of reverse psychology.Since Sun Zi’s axiom “Appear
strong weak…” was so universally understood,most commanders will assume
that by appearing weak, you are actually strong and are simply baiting a trap.
                                                                            161
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Han Dynasty China
In 166 B.C. General Li Cuang of the Han dynasty was out on patrol
with a hundred cavalrymen when they spotted three Xiongnu horsemen
on a scouting patrol. The Han cavalry gave chase killing two and
capturing the third. On their return to their main camp they were
spotted by several thousand Xiongnu horsemen in the distance.
The troop commanders were all for making a run for it, but Li Cuang
knew they could never outride thousands of horsemen over a hundred
kilometers to reach their main army. Instead of running away, Li Cuang
ordered his men to advance towards the enemy until they were within
two kilometers. Then he ordered them to stop out in the open and
dismount. He further ordered that all the horses be unsaddled and the
men to relax and lie down in the grass.
The Xiongnu sent scouts to investigate but Li Cuang sent a few of his
men out to chase them away. Watching from a distance, the Xiongnu
commanders suspected that the Han patrol was a decoy and the rest of
the army lay somewhere nearby waiting in ambush.
The Xiongnu decided to stay and watch from a distance. That night
they heard the Han soldiers singing and drinking, certainly not making
any effort to escape. This seemed to convince the Xiongnu that the Han
were using a clever ruse in order to launch a surprise night attack.
The next morning Li Cuang and his men discovered the Xiongnu had
disappeared and they were able to leisurely make their way back to the
main camp.
Three Kingdoms Period China
In 149 B.C. the famous strategist Kong Ming of Shu, wishing to attack
the state of Wei, sent an advance force to scout for the enemy. Leading
the army of Wei was Sima Yi who also sent an advance force of fifty
thousand troops. The two vanguards met and engaged in battle, but the
Wei forces were superior and won the day.
The defeated Shu vanguard raced back to the main body of Kong
Ming's army whose troops, seeing the look of fear in the faces of their
162
                                        The Strategy Of Open City Gates
comrades, thought that the enemy was upon them, and fled in panic.
Kong Ming and a few bodyguards fled to the city of Yangping with the
Wei army in hot pursuit.
Vastly outnumbered and unable to either retreat or sustain a siege,
Kong Ming played a last resort strategy that made him famous
throughout China. He removed all the guards and battle flags from the
walls and had all four of the city gates flung open. When Sima Yi
approached the city he could see only a few old men nonchalantly
sweeping the grounds within the gates. Kong Ming was seen sitting in
one of the towers smiling and playing his lute.
Sima Yi remarked to his advisors, "That man seems to be too happy for
my comfort. Doubtless he has some deep laid scheme in mind to bring
us all to disaster." As they stood spellbound, the strains of Kong
Ming's lute reached their ears, and this only heightened their sense of
foreboding.
Such peculiar behavior was too suspicious. Fearing a clever trap, Sima
Yi turned his army back and retreated. After the army left, Kong Ming
and his remaining troops departed in the opposite direction and made
their way safely back to their capital.
Hojo Regency Japan
During the battle of Mikatagahara in 1572, the Takeda army, led by
Takeda Shingen, was planning to lay siege to Hamamatsu castle
belonging to Tokugawa leyasu. To avoid being besieged and starved
out by the vastly superior Takeda army, lyasu prepared defensive
positions three kilometers away in order to engage the Takeda before
they could reach the castle. The battle was fiercely fought throughout
the day, but by nightfall, the Tokugawa forces were exhausted and were
retreating for the castle with the Takeda giving chase.
The commander of the castle wanted to close and bolt the city gates,
but lyasu interrupted him saying, "Closing the gates is exactly what
Shingen is expecting. Then our remaining troops would be left out in
the open where they would be hunted down one by one."
                                                                    163
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Tokugawa ordered that the gates be left open and a huge brazier lit in
front of the gates to guide the fleeing soldiers through the dark
countryside. In addition, he ordered a large war drum to be beaten so
that his troops could follow the sound until they saw the beacon.
When the Takeda forces arrived at the castle to see the gates open and a
brazier burning in front, Shingen immediately suspected a trap and
ordered his troops to pull back.
In this way leyasu was able to prevent the Takeda from attacking while
allowing his remaining forces to find their way back to the safety of the
castle.
Summary
In a desperate situation, often the only recourse is to do something
completely unexpected. Unusual behavior in a time of crises arouses
suspicions and doubts. Placing doubt in your enemy's mind means he is
already half defeated. However, this strategy requires supreme self-
control. Those nervous about the chances for failure will, by their
actions, give away the bluff.
164
                                The Strategy Of Sowing Discord
                     Fǎn Jiàn Jì
                     Strategy 33
      The Strategy Of Sowing Discord
Reduce the effectiveness of your enemy by inflicting
discord among them.
Sun Zi, The Art of War
Plans and projects for harming the enemy are not
confined to any one method. Sometimes entice his wise
and virtuous men away so that he has no counselors. Or
send treacherous people to his country to wreck his
administration. Sometimes use cunning deceptions to
alienate his ministers from the sovereign. Or send skilled
craftsmen to encourage the people to exhaust their wealth.
Or present him with licentious musicians and dancers to
change his customs. Or give him beautiful women to
bewilder him.
Jia Lin
                                                           165
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Undermine your enemy's ability to fight by secretly causing discord
between him and his friends, allies, advisors, family, commanders,
soldiers, and population. While he is preoccupied settling internal
disputes, his ability to attack or defend is compromised.'
Warring States Period China
Towards the end of the Warring States period, as the smaller kingdoms
fell prey to the larger, the kingdom of Qin had become the single most
powerful state. Qin posed the greatest threat to the other surviving
kingdoms, which sought to form an alliance to stem Qin's growing
power. The various commanders of the empire gathered in the formerly
powerful state of Zhou to plan an attack on Qin.
King Chao Xiong of Qin was concerned about the gathering of
warlords when his minister, Marquis Ying, said, "Allow me to get rid of
them. Qin has no quarrel with these 'commanders of the empire.' They
gather now to make plans for an attack against Qin simply because
each seeks wealth and fame for himself.
Look at your own hounds-some are sleeping, some are up, some walk
about and others are simply standing where they are. But throw a bone
to them and they will all be on their feet in an instant, snapping at each
other. Why? You have given them a reason to fight each other."
The king understood and asked the minister to continue.
Minister Ying called in another official and said, "We must dispatch
Tang Chu complete with musicians and five thousand in gold to set up
quarters in Wu An. There he will send out a proclamation addressed to
all military commanders saying that whoever wishes to defect to Qin
will be given a sumptuous banquet and generous gifts of money. But
those who conspire against Qin will receive nothing."
Minister Ying turned to Tang Chu and said, "In order to succeed you
must not care where the money goes, but insure that you distribute all
of it. Once the money is gone we will send another five thousand
Taels!"
166
                                        The Strategy Of Sowing Discord
A few days after Tang Chu left with the gold, he sent a report saying
that he was able to distribute only three thousand pieces of gold before
all the commanders of the empire took to fighting amongst themselves
to see who would claim the greater reward.
Needless to say they were unable to cooperate and no alliance against
Qin was formed. For the next thirty years Qin continue to sow discord
between the remaining states. Their constant bickering and infighting
prevented them from ever uniting against their common enemy. Qin
conquered them one by one until none remained.
Three Kingdoms Period China
Cao Cao, the warlord of Wei, was on campaign against a rival
commander Zhou Yu. Cao Cao won several battles and chased his
enemy south into an area of rivers, lakes, and marshes. Coming from
the northern plains of Wei, Cao's troops were unaccustomed to naval
combat and suffered their first defeat at the hands of Zhou. Cao Cao
made camp beside the river and began constructing an armada while
retraining his troops in naval tactics.
To this end, he hired the services of two renowned naval commanders
who came from the south. During this time, one of Cao Cao's advisors,
Jiang Kan, offered another plan.
Since Jiang was a former friend of Zhou Yu, he would go to try and
talk him into surrendering and joining with Wei. Cao Cao agreed to the
plan and Jiang was given a small boat and an oarsman to paddle him up
river to Zhou Yu's camp. Zhou Yu guessed right away Jiang's real
purpose and played in turn the tactic of the "doomed spy." 24 Zhou Yu
treated Jian like a long lost brother and arranged a celebration of food
and wine.
During the feasting, Zhou Yu slipped out and gave instructions to his
attendants to forge two letters and place them on his desk. During the
24 According to Sun Zi’s Art of War, a “doomed spy” is a enemy spy whom
you allow to watch staged events so that they will convincingly file a false
report. After the ruse is discovered, the spy is usually executed for
incompetence, hence the term “doomed”.
                                                                        167
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
festivities, Jiang tried to persuade Zhou Yu to join forces with him, but
Zhou Yu feigned drunkenness to avoid the subject.
Later Zhou Yu invited his friend to share his quarters, and shortly after
retiring he pretended to pass out.
For a while, Jiang also pretended to sleep, but after making sure his
host was asleep, Jiang silently crept about the room to see what he
could find. He discovered the two letters and was intrigued to read
about a plan to betray Cao Cao in the next battle. More shocking was
that the letters were signed by Wei's new naval commanders. Jiang
quickly hid the letters in his robe.
Early the next morning he made his apologies and left before Zhou Yu
awoke. When he arrived back at Cao Cao's camp, he reported that his
mission had been a failure, but it was not a complete loss since he had
some intelligence concerning a plot to stage a palace coup.
He then produced the forged letters. After reading the documents Cao
Cao had the two naval commanders executed.
In this way, Zhou Yu removed Cao Cao's two best assets in naval
warfare. When Cao Cao launched a naval attack months later he
suffered a terrible defeat and barely escaped with his life (see Chapter
34)
Six Dynasties Period China
During the later Wei dynasty, the emperor Tai Wu led a hundred
thousand troops against the Song general Zang Zhi. The emperor, with
his superior forces, chased general Zhang to the city of Yu where he
was cornered. The city was strongly fortified, and so the emperor
planned to surround it and starve the defenders into surrender.
Feeling confident of his position, the emperor sent a cart carrying a
large jar of wine to the city gate with the message asking for the
traditional exchange of wine before commencing his siege of the city.
Zang Zhi, knowing that he needed to fight a decisive battle quickly or
suffer defeat, saw this as an opportunity. He sent some soldiers to
168
                                        The Strategy Of Sowing Discord
gratefully accept the jar of wine and in turn deliver another large jar
sealed with the wine maker's stamp.
When a cup of this wine was poured for the emperor, it was discovered
to be urine. This caused the emperor a humiliating loss of face before
his own troops, and, in a rage, he ordered an immediate assault on the
city. The defenders were well prepared and the bodies of the slain
imperial troops piled up nearly to the top of the ramparts. In his haste
and anger, the emperor lost half his forces.
Summary
A person's ability to function effectively is dependent on being in
harmony with one's environment. By disrupting your enemy's
environment, you disrupt his harmony, thus interfering with his ability
to attack or defend.
                                                                    169
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
170
                                         The Strategy Of Injuring Yourself
                               Kǔ Ròu Jì
                              Strategy 34
             The Strategy Of Injuring Yourself
     To be the first to gain victory, initially display some weakness
     to the enemy and only afterward do battle. Then your effort
     will be half, but the achievement doubled.
     The Six Secret Teachings of the Tai Gong
Pretending to be injured has two possible applications. In the first, the
enemy is lulled into relaxing his guard since he no longer considers you
to be an immediate threat. The second is a way of ingratiating yourself
to your enemy by pretending the injury was caused by a mutual enemy.
Three Kingdoms Period China
During the last days of the crumbling Han Empire the renowned
general Sun Ce was on campaign against a rival province. He had
chased the enemy to the walled city of Moling where they were holed
up.
                                                                      171
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Sun knew it would be too costly to attack fortified positions, so he
attempted to arouse the enemy's anger by parading up and down the
city walls hurling insults at the defenders. But the commander of the
city, Xue Li, refused to come out to fight despite the taunts.
One day while Sun was out riding, a soldier on the city wall shot an
arrow that hit Sun in the thigh, only slightly penetrating his armor. Sun
rode back to camp where he was treated for a flesh wound. However,
rumors were spreading that the general had been mortally wounded.
The commanders thought he should go out of his tent to reassure the
troops, but Sun used the situation to play a stratagem.
He let it be known that he was mortally wounded and had his soldiers
pretend to prepare for a funeral ceremony. Hearing that Sun Ce was
dead, Xue Li saw this as his chance and rushed his army out to attack
the camp.
Sun Ce's troops pretended to retreat leading the attackers into an
ambush that closed in from four directions with Sun charging out on his
horse to the shouts of "Sun Ce lives!"
The shocked city garrison threw down their arms and surrendered while
Xue Li and a few loyal guards were slain trying to escape.
Edo Period Japan
During the Tokugawa period, Kaei Juzo, a former spy, had come under
suspicion and was in danger of being assassinated. It turned out that the
man sent to kill him was a former acquaintance called Tonbe. Not
wishing to kill his old friend, Tonbe and Juzo worked out the classic
ploy as follows.
Tonbe brought Juzo back as a prisoner to the Shogun. Juzo begged the
Shogun to allow him one last dignity: permission to commit Seppuku.
25
25 A form of ritual suicide by using a dagger to disembowel yourself.
172
                                       The Strategy Of Injuring Yourself
The Shogun, curious to see the notorious spy's bravery in death,
allowed him that privilege. Juzo was given a dagger, which he plunged
into his belly, and, cutting sideways, he spilled his intestines onto the
ground before falling over. The guards removed the body and threw it
in the castle's moat.
A short time later Juzo quietly swum to shore and escaped the district.
Knowing that his warrior's reputation would merit him the right of
committing seppuku, Juzo had strapped a dead fox across his abdomen,
when the fox's intestines spilled out it was indistinguishable from
human intestines.
Three Kingdoms Period China
Zhou Yu was the chief advisor for the state of Wu, which was at war
with the powerful kingdom of Wei lead by the warlord Cao Cao.
Cao Cao had sent two spies posing as defectors over to the Wu capital
but Zhou Yu spotted them immediately. Rather than have the spies
executed, Zhou Yu again used the tactic of the "doomed spy" (see
Chapter 33).
Zhou Yu sent for his senior and most trusted naval commander, Huang
Gai, and together they devised a strategy. The next day at court Huang
started an argument with Zhou Yu that escalated to the point where
Zhou Yu ordered the naval commander's execution. Horrified at the
prospect of losing one of their ablest commanders, the other court
advisors intervened on Huang's behalf.
Reluctantly, Zhou Yu commuted the sentence to fifty strokes of a staff
to be carried out in the town square. This punishment was often fatal in
itself, and the Wei spies who watched the beating were convinced that
Huang Gai and Zhou Yu had truly fallen out. The next day, while still
recovering from the ordeal, Huang secretly sent a message to the Wei
camp offering to defect.
At first, Cao Cao was suspicious, but when he called in his spies, they
confirmed seeing Huang beaten to near death in the city square. Cao
Cao was in desperate need for an able naval commander (having
                                                                      173
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
recently executed his top two admirals on suspicions of treachery), so
he gave the order to have Huang smuggled into his camp.
After the usual formalities, Cao Cao asked for Huang Gai's advice on
how to train his land based infantry in naval warfare.
Huang Gai said, "Since the men of Wei are used to fighting on solid
earth we should make the war junks as stable as the earth. Your
lordship has a great number of boats, and if we had them strung
together with chains, and the gaps between the boats covered over with
planking, then it would be as stable as land."
Cao Cao agreed to the plan, and after weeks of construction the huge
floating platform proved so stable that the Wei soldiers felt like they
were walking on solid ground.
When Zhou Yu's spies reported Cao Cao's new naval strategy, he was
ready to attack.
The next day, some say by divine intervention, the winds changed
direction enabling Zhou Yu to send fire ships down-wind against the
floating island of Wei. When Cao Cao felt the change in wind direction
and saw the burning ships bearing down, he knew all was lost. The
minute one of his ships caught fire the whole fleet was doomed since,
being chained together, no ship could escape.
The entire Wei armada was completely destroyed and Cao Cao himself
barely escaped with a handful of troops.
Summary
The tactic of feigning injury to lower your opponent's guard or avoid
aggression is so universally applied that it is even found among many
species of birds, fish, and animals. The principle is simple: if you are
sick or injured, you are less of a threat.
174
                             The Strategy Of Combining Tactics
                    Lián Huán Jì
                      Strategy 35
    The Strategy Of Combining Tactics
Do not repeat tactics which gained you victory in the past,
but let your tactics be molded by the infinite variety of
circumstances.
Sun Zi, The Art of War
Appearance and intention inevitably ensnare people when
artfully used, even if people sense that there is an ulterior
intention behind the overt appearance.
When you set up ploys and opponents fall for them, then
you win by letting them act on your ruse. As for those who
do not fall for a ploy, when you see they won't fall into one
trap, you have another set. Then even if opponents haven't
fallen for your original ploy, in effect they actually have.
Yagyu Munenori, Family Book On The Art Of War
                                                              175
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
In important matters, one should use several strategies applied
simultaneously. Keep different plans operating in an overall scheme. In
this manner if any one strategy fails you would still have several others
to fall back on. Combining even weak strategies in unison has a greater
effectiveness than applying them sequentially.
Warring States Period China
The heir of Chu, Qing Xiong, was a hostage at the court of Qi when
news came of his father's death. He asked permission from the king of
Qi to return home to attend the funeral.
The king replied, "If we are given five hundred li of your eastern lands
you will be allowed to return. If you refuse you will stay here."
Qing Xiong agreed to cede the land for his freedom and was allowed to
return to Chu and become its new king. Shortly thereafter, an envoy of
fifty chariots arrived from Qi demanding to take possession of the
territory. The king of Chu summoned his top three generals one after
the other and asked each in turn for their recommendations.
The first general said, 'The king has no recourse but to give up the land.
From a king must come only the truth .To have promised something
and failed to give it would be a breach of faith. Thereafter no one will
ever trust your promise.
I submit that you give them the land to show your good faith, then
attack Qi and fight to get it back, which would show your valor."
The second general was asked for his opinion and he said, "You cannot
give it back. What makes a country strong is the land. To give five
hundred li is to lose almost half our country.
I ask to be allowed to go out and defend the eastern border."
Then the third general was called in and he said, "You cannot give them
the land, yet we are not powerful enough to defend it alone. I beg
permission to go west and seek aid from Qin."
176
                                       The Strategy Of Combining Tactics
After hearing the counsel of his three advisors, the king consulted his
Minister Shen Ci asking which of the three strategies he should follow.
Shen Ci said, "Use them all! Let each general carry out his own
strategy unbeknownst to the others and we shall see which prevails."
So the next day the king sent the first general to meet the envoy from
Qi and surrender the territory. The day after that he commissioned the
second general to defend the eastern border. On the third day, he sent
the third general to Qin with a plea for aid.
The first general rode out to the eastern territory to rendezvous with the
envoy from Qi who had come to take possession of the territory. The
next day they were intercepted by the second general who told the
envoy from Qi that he had mustered troops to defend the territory.
The envoy turned to the first general and asked, "You have come to
surrender the territory, but now we have another general to defend it.
How can this be?''
The first general replied, "I was personally instructed by the king in this
matter. This man is usurping his authority and he should be attacked."
The Qi envoy sent for reinforcements and when they arrived a few days
later, they were led by the king himself. Just as they were about to form
battle lines the third general arrived with a relief force from Qin.
The Qin general called out to the king of Qi, "To have detained the heir
of Chu was wicked, and to rob him of five hundred li of his eastern
lands is unjust. If you wish to withdraw your troops, you may. If not,
then you must contend with us as well."
The king of Qi was frightened by this unexpected turn of events and
quietly retreated. The king of Chu thus saved both his territory and his
reputation.
Warring States Period China
In 284 B.C., the state of Yan attacked and defeated Qi. The remaining
Qi forces under the command of Tian Dan fled to the city of Jimo for a
                                                                       177
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
final stand. The renowned Yan general Yue Yi had surrounded the city
when the news came that the king of Yan had died and was succeeded
by Prince Hui.
Years earlier, when the prince was still heir apparent, he and general
Yue had numerous clashes and disagreements. When Tian Dan heard
the news he sent secret agents to the new king to spread rumors that
Yue Yi was planning to revolt because he feared being executed for
past disagreements. When Prince Hui heard this rumor, he sent another
general to replace Yue Yi who fled to another state.
The replacement general, Qi Che, was a brash and arrogant up-start
who began reissuing orders and procedures which merely succeeded in
causing confusion and dissension among the officers.
Next, Tian Dan had the womenfolk line the city walls and beg for a
peaceful surrender while he sent gold and treasure collected from the
city's wealthiest citizens to General Qi Che with a note asking that the
women and children be spared in return for the peaceful surrender of
the city.
These events convinced Qi Che that the city was truly about to
capitulate, and he allowed his troops to relax their guard. After this
careful preparation, Tian Dan felt the time was right to launch his
counter attack.
First, he had the citizens of the city gather with drums and cooking pots
and instructed them that on a signal they were to make as much noise
as possible.
He then had breaches made along the city walls from the inside.
Next, a herd of cattle was painted in bizarre patterns and knives and
sickles tied to their horns and torches tied to their tails.
Just before daylight three events occurred in rapid succession. The
citizens within the city struck up a cacophony of noise that startled
the sleeping Yan troops.
178
                                      The Strategy Of Combining Tactics
Then the torches on the tails of the cattle were lit and they were
released through the breaches in the wall.
The enraged animals ran madly about the Yen camp killing stunned
troops with their horns and setting fire to tents with their tails.
Then Qi’s crack troops rushed out from the gates to attack the now
terrified and utterly confused troops. Tian Dan defeated the Yan army
and went on to conquer more than seventy cities.
Heian Period Japan
In 1183 in what would be called the battle of Kurikara, Taira Koremori
of the ruling Taira clan led a hundred thousand troops east to attack
Minamoto Yoshinaka of the rebel Minamoto clan.
To enter the Minamoto territory the Taira would have to cross Japan's
central mountain range at its northern end where the mountains were
little more than large hills. There was only one pass that an army the
size of the Taira could use - the Kurikara pass.
Traveling east through the pass one would see near the other side an
open valley that appeared to cut through the mountain, but in fact the
valley narrowed down into a box canyon. Seeking to take advantage of
this unusual terrain, Yoshinaka devised the following strategies.
First, he needed to buy time1 so he sent a detachment of troops to
occupy a small hill downslope of the Taira advance. These troops
carried extra flags, which they planted on the hill to make it appear that
a large host was stationed there.
The next day the Minamoto stationed on the hill challenged the Taira to
battle according to all the ancient samurai protocols, to which the Taira
readily complied. First, there was an archery duel using humming bulb
arrows, then sharp point arrows, then individual duels, and finally a
skirmish of a hundred cavalry each.
While all this gentlemanly warfare was being fought, Yoshinaka had
sent another detachment of troops through the forest to quietly set up
                                                                       179
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
positions to the rear of the Taira. By nightfall the Taira were about to
retire when two events occurred.
First, the hidden Minamoto troops launched a sudden attack from the
rear, while the troops on the hill charged down to join the first group.
This sudden attack caused the Taira to retreat down the pass, but at this
point, the second event occurred.
Yoshinaka had earlier confiscated a herd of cattle and had torches tied
to their horns. The torches were set on fire and the enraged animals
were released so that they charged up through the pass towards the
retreating Taira.
The bizarre spectacle of the enraged and fiery beasts charging through
the pass caused complete panic among the Taira troops who saw their
only avenue of escape to be down the side of the pass and into the
valley.
In the darkness, the troops scrambled down the steep slopes and on
through the valley, many being killed in falls. When the first of the
fleeing soldiers reached the box end they attempted to turn back, but
those in front were crushed by the weight of their own troops who kept
piling in, not yet realizing they were trapped.
Yoshinaka then launched his final tactic and sent his main body of
troops into the valley after the fleeing Taira. The slaughter was
horrendous, with over seventy thousand Taira soldiers killed.
Summary
To insure victory one must know how to launch simultaneous attacks.
Both from left, and from right; from the outside, and from within; from
above, and from below. Advantage goes to those who can attack on
several fronts; disadvantage to those who must defend against more
than one.
180
                                                   If All Else Fails, Retreat
                         Zǒu Wéi Shàng Ce
                              Strategy 36
                     If All Else Fails, Retreat
      If greatly outnumbered, then retreat. While it is possible for a
      small force to put up a great fight, in the end it will lose to
      superior numbers.
      Sun Zi, The Art of War
If it becomes obvious that your current course of action will lead to
defeat, then retreat and regroup. When your side is losing, there are
only three choices remaining: surrender, compromise, or escape.
Surrender is complete defeat, compromise is half defeat, but escape is
not defeat. As long as you are not defeated, you still have a chance.
Spring And Autumn Period China
In 597 B.C., the states of Chu and Jin fought the battle of Bi. For days
before the battle, the two armies faced each other, unsure whether or
not a battle would actually take place. Several small skirmishes were
                                                                         181
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
fought to release the energies of the officers, but it appeared that a
peace treaty would be negotiated instead.
On the Jin side, the commander of the left wing, Shi Hui, advised
caution saying, "It would be well to take precautions. If Chu has no
hostile intent, then we can do away with the precautions and conclude
an alliance.
But if Chu should come charging down on us, the precautions will
prevent our defeat. Even when the Lords come together at a meeting,
they take care not to dismiss their personal bodyguards."
But the commander of the main body, Xian Gu, disagreed, and only Shi
Hui took the precaution of stationing troops in ambush near his
positions.
The next day, during a small skirmish, the Chu forces misunderstood
the commotion for an attack by Jin and launched a full-scale assault.
The Chu charged forth with such speed and determination that the Jin
lines collapsed from the impact.
Another Chu division made ready to attack the Jin left wing
commanded by Shi Hui. An officer rode up to Shi Hui and asked,
"Should we wait for their attack?''
Shi Hui replied, "The Chu army is now at the peak of its vigor. If they
make a concerted attack on us, our army is bound to be wiped out!
Better to gather up our forces and quit the field. Though we will still
share the disgrace with the other divisions, we at least spare the lives
of our men. Is that not the best that could be had from this situation?"
Shi Hui had the men stationed in ambush fight a rear guard action,
enabling him to retreat with almost his entire division intact. The main
Jin troops suffered a resounding defeat with heavy casualties.
Commander Xian Gu, who had so thoughtlessly disregarded the advice
to take precautions, was found guilty of incompetence and executed.
182
                                                    If All Else Fails, Retreat
Warring States Period China
When Wang Chu was hostage in Yan, the king wanted him executed,
and so he fled. While trying to cross the border he was captured by a
border guard.
"The king of Yan wants me killed," said Wang Chu to the guard,
"because someone told him I have a pearl of great value and he wants
it.
In truth, I lost it long ago, but the king refuses to believe me. If you turn
me in, I shall say that you took the pearl from me and swallowed it.
Your king will have you killed and turn you entrails inside out to find it.
If you want to turn me over to your ruler I cannot dissuade you by
offering you anything, but remember, if I am taken, it is your vitals
which will be chopped to pieces."
The guard promptly let Chu go.
Ming Dynasty China
The Ming emperor Huidi had disposed of all his uncles except one who
feigned madness (see Chapter 27). In 1403, this very uncle, the prince
of Yan, led a huge army to the capital of Nanjing to seize the throne.
The city was surrounded and the emperor was considering suicide
when he was stopped by a eunuch who told him that his grandfather,
Emperor Hong Wu, had left a chest in his care with orders that, should
any great crisis occur to threaten the dynasty, the reigning emperor
should open the chest.
"Let us open it at once then," said the emperor, "and see what my
grandfather would do were he here now"
When the lid was lifted, the box was found to contain the robes of a
Buddhist monk, a diploma, a razor, and ten ingots of silver.
                                                                          183
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
The emperor understood the meaning at once and with a handful of
attendants fled the palace through a secret tunnel to a Buddhist temple.
There he shaved his head and put on the robes. He made his way out of
the city and all the way to Sichuan province where he lived in obscurity
in a remote monastery.
Meanwhile the palace had burned down during the fighting and it was
assumed that the emperor had died in the fire.
Forty years later during the reign of Emperor Ying Zong (the fourth
since Huidi's time), an old Buddhist priest arrived at court and claimed
to be the old emperor Huidi. It turned out the man was an impostor, but
a rumor began that Huidi was still alive.
To quell the rumors and settle the issue, an official investigation was
made which discovered that Huidi was indeed still alive and living as a
Buddhist priest. The old emperor was invited back to the capital with
great ceremony and he lived out his last days as a guest in the palace.
However, he was kept under a watchful eye!
Summary
The ancient Daoist sages invented the principle of "non-action," or
"following the course of the times." To not take advantage of an
opportunity presented is a violation of this principle. Conversely, to
fight a battle that cannot be won is an equal violation of heaven's law.
In the art of war, an often overlooked but vital talent is knowing when
to run.
184
                                         Chronological Tables
                     Chronological Tables
China
Xia Dynasty: 2205-1776 B.C.
Shang Dynasty: 1766-1122 B.C.
Zhou Dynasty: 1122-256 B.C.
Spring & Autumn Period: 771-481 B.C.
Warring States Period: 403-221 B.C.
Qin Dynasty: 221-297 B.C.
Han Dynasty: 221 B.C.-A .D. 220
Three Kingdoms: 220-280
Six Dynasties: 222-589
Sui Dynasty: 589-618
Tang Dynasty: 618-907
Five Dynasties: 907-959
Song Dynasty: 960-1126
Yuan Dynasty: 1279-1368
Ming Dynasty: 1368-1644
Qing Dynasty: 1644-1911
Japan
Legendary Era: ?-645
Nara: 646-793
Heian: 794-1184
Kamakura: 1185-1367
Muromachi: 1368-1575
Momoyama: 1576-1614
Edo: 1615-1867
                                                          185
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
186
                                                          Bibliography
                          Bibliography
Alexander, Bevin. How Great Generals Win. W.W. Norton & York,
1993
Alexander, William, and Mason, George Henry. Views of 18th Century
China. Studio Editions, London, 1988 (First published 1804-5).
Bingham, Woodbridge. The Founding of the Tang Dynasty. Octagon
Books, New York, 1975.
Birch, Cyril, Editor. Anthology Of Chinese Literature: From Early
Times to the Fourteenth Century. Grove Press, New York, 1965.
Blumenson, Martin, and Stokesbury, James L. Masters of the Art of
Command. Da Capo, Boston, 1975.
Chesneaux, Jean. Popular Movements and Secret Societies in China,
1840-1950 .Stanford University Press, California, 1972.
Cleary, Thomas. The Japanese Art Of War: Understanding the Culture
of Strategy. Shambala Publications, Boston, 1991.
Cleary, Thomas. Mastering the Art of War: Zhuge Liang's and Liu Lis
Commentaries on the Classic by Sun Tzu. Shambala, Publications,
Boston, 1989.
Cleary, Thomas, The Lost Art Of War: Sun Bin's Art of War, Harper
San Francisco, 1996. Crump, J. J., Jr., Translator,
Chan-Kuo Ts 'e (Intrigues of the Warring States ). Clarendon Press,
Oxford, 1970.
Daraul, Arkon, A History of Secret Societies, Citadel Press, New York,
1990.
                                                                    187
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
De Lacouperie, Terrien, Western Origin of the Early Chinese
Civilization, From 2,300B.C. To 200 A.D. Osnabruck, Otto Zeller,
1966. (First published 1894).
Deshimaru, Taisen, The Zen Way to the Martial Arts, E.P. Dutton, New
York, 1982.
Draeger, Donn F, Ninjitsu, The Art of Invisibility, Yen books, Japan,
1989.
Dun J. Li, The Essence Of Chinese Civilization, D. Van Nostrand,
Princeton, 1967.
Dunnigan, James F, and Bay, Austin, A Quick and Dirty Guide to War,
William Morrow, New York , 1991
Dunnigan, James F, How To Make War, William Morrow, New York,
1988.
Fang, Achilles, The Chronicle of the Three Kingdoms, Cambridge
University Press, 1952.
Fang Hsuan-ling. Rogers, Michael C., Translator, The Chronicle of Fu
Chien, University of California Press, Berkeley, 1968
Farris, William Wayne, Heavenly Warriors: The Evolution of Japan's
Military 500-1300, Harvard University Press, 1992.
Friday, Karl F. Hired Swords: The Rise of Private Warrior Power in
Early Japan. Stanford University Press, California, 1992.
Gardner, C. S. Chinese Traditional Historiography. Cambridge
University Press, 1938
Griffith, Samual B. Sun Tzu , The Art of War, Oxford University Press,
1963
Heider, John, The Tao Of Leadership, Bantam Books, New York, 1986.
Hiroaki, Sato, Translator, The Sword and The Mind, Overlook Press,
New York, 1985
188
                                                           Bibliography
Hiroaki, Sato, Translator. Legends of the Samurai. Overlook Press,
New York, 1995.
Kierman, Frank A., Editor. Chinese Ways in Warfare. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, 1974.
Johnston, Alastair lain. Cultural Realism, Strategic Culture and Grand
Strategy in Chinese History. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
1995
Koh Kok Kiang, and Liu Yi. The Secret Art of War: Thirty Six
Stratagems. Asiapac, Singapore, 1992.
Lao Tzu, Tao Te Ching. Penguin Classics, New York, 1963.
Lau, Theodora, Best-Loved Chinese Proverbs. Harper Perennial, New
York, 1995
Legge, James, Translator. The Chinese Classics: Vol. V. The Ch'un Ts'e
with The Tso Chuan (Spring and Autumn Annals). Oxford University
Press, Shanghai, 1935.
Legge, James, Translator. The Chinese Classics: Vol. III, The Shoo
King or Book of Historical Documents. Oxford University Press,
Shanghai, 1935.
Lewis, Mark Edward, Sanctioned Violence in Early China. State
University of New York Press, New York, 1990.
Li Yu-ning, The First Emperor of China. ISAP, White Plains, 1975.
Lo Kuan-Chung. Moss Roberts, Translator. Romance of the Three
Kingdoms. Pantheon Books, New York , 1976.
Liu 1-Ch'ing. Mather, Richard B., Translator. Shih-shuo Hsin-yu, A
New Account of Tales of the World. University of Minnesota Press,
Minneapolis, 1976.
                                                                    189
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Ma Senliang. Sanshiliu li Gu lin Yin Li. (The Thirty-six Strategies with
Examples from Times Past and Present). Starite Book Co. Hong Kong,
1985
Ma, Y. W., and Lau, Joseph S. M. Traditional Chinese Stories.
Columbia University Press, New York, 1978.
McNeilly, Mark. Sun Tzu and the Art of Business. Oxford Press, New
York, 1996.
Macgowan, J. The Imperial History of China. Curzon Press, New
York ,1973. (First published 1897).
Machiavelli, Niccolo, The Prince. Bantam Book Classics, New York,
1985.
Morris, Ivan, The Nobility of Failure: Tragic Heroes in the History of
Japan, The Noonday Press, New York, 1975.
Murray, Williamson, with MacGregor Knox and Alvin Bernstein, The
Making of Strategy, Rulers, States, and War. Cambridge University
Press, 1994
Murray, Dianne H., and Qin Baoqi, The Origins of the Tiandihui: The
Chinese Triads in Legend and History. Stanford University Press,
California, 1994.
Miyamoto, Musashi, The Book Of Five Rings. Bantam Books, New
York , 1982.
Needham, Joseph, Science and Civilization in China, Vol. IT: History
of Scientific Thought, Cambridge Press, 1954.
Nicolle, David, The Mongol Warlords, Firebird Books, Dorset/
England, 1990.
Ong Hean-Tatt, The Chinese Pakua: An Expose. Pelanduk Publishers,
Malaysia, 1991
190
                                                          Bibliography
Ownby, David, Brotherhoods and Secret Societies in Early and Mid-
Qing China, Stanford University Press, California, 1996
Ownby, David, Editor. Secret Societies Reconsidered: Perspectives on
the Social History of Modern South Asia and Southeast Asia. M.E.
Sharpe, Armonk, 1993
Palmer, M., and Breuilly, E., Translators, The Book of Chuang Tzu,.
Arkana, London, 1996.
Pan, Lynn, Sons of The Yellow Emperor: A History of the Chinese
Diaspora, Little, Brown & Company, Boston, 1990.
Pan K'u. Homer H. Dubs, Translator, History of the Former Han
Dynasty (Han Shu), Vol. I-II. Waverly Press, Baltimore, 1938.
Pan K'u. Clyde Bailey Sargent, Translator, Wang Mang, Hyperion
Books, Westport, Connecticut, 1977.
Phillipi, Donald L., Translator. Kojiki (Record of Ancient Things).
University of Tokyo Press, Japan, 1968.
Piggott, Juliet. Japanese Mythology, Peter Bedrick Books, New York,
1969.
Reps, Paul, Zen Flesh, Zen Bones, Doubleday, New York, 1972.
Roberts, J.A.G. A History of China: Prehistory to C.1800, St. Martin's
Press, New York, 1996
Roberts, Moss, Chinese Tales & Fantasies. Pantheon Books, New
York, 1979.
Sage, Steven. Ancient Sichuan and the Unification of China, State
University of New York Press, New York, 1992.
Sansom, George, A History Of Japan, 133 4-1615. Stanford University,
Press, California, 1961
                                                                   191
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Sawyer, Ralph D., Translator, The Seven Military Classics of Ancient
China. Westview Press, Boulder, 1993
Sawyer, Ralph D., Translator, Unorthodox Strategies for the Everyday
Warrior, Westview Press, Boulder, 1996
Sawyer, Ralph D ., Translator, The Complete Art of War; Sun Tzu, Sun
Pin, Westview Press, Boulder, 1996
Schlegel, Gustave, The Hung League, Lang & Co. Batavia, 1866.
(Reprinted by AMS New York, 1973.)
Shu Han, Sanshiliu li Miben lijie, (The Secret Book of the Thirty-six
Strategies, with Explanations). National Press, Taipei, 1986
Sun Tzu. Roger T. Ames, Translator, The Art of War, Ballantine Books,
New York, 1993
Sun Tzu. Clavell, James, Editor, The Art of War, Delacorte Press, New
York, 1983.
Sun Pin. D. C. Lau and Roger T. Ames, Translators, The Art of
Warfare, Ballantine Books, New York, 1996.
Takuan Soho. Wilson, William Scott, Translator, The Unfettered Mind:
Writings of the Zen Master to the Sword Master. Kodansha
International , Tokyo, 1986
Teng, S. Y. The Nien Army and Their Guerrilla Warfare 1851-1868.
Paris Mouton & Co, The Hague, Netherlands, 1961.
Turnbull, Stephen, The Samurai, A Military History. Osprey Publishing,
London, 1977.
Turnbull, Stephen, Samurai Warriors. Blandford/ London, 1987
Von Senger Harro, Myron B. Gubitz, Translator, The Book of
Strategems, Viking Press/ New York/ 1991
192
                                                        Bibliography
Waltham, Clae, Shu Ching: Book of History. Henry Regnery1 Chicago,
1971
Wang Gungwu, The Structure of Power in North China During the Five
Dynasties, University of Malaya Press, 1963
Ward, J .S.M., The Hung Society Vol. I-III. The Baskerville Press,
London, 1926.
Watson, Burton/ Translator, Records of the Grand Historian of China,
(Shih Chi), Columbia University Press, New York, 1961.
Watson, Burton1 Translator, The Tso Chuan, Columbia University
Press, 1989
Wechsler, Howard J., Mirror to the Son of Heaven, Wei Cheng at the
Court of Tang T'ai-tsung. Yale University Press, 1974
Williamson, H. R. Wang An Shih, Vol. I-II. Hyperion, Connecticut,
1935
Wright, Arthur E., The Sui Dynasty, Alfred A. Knopf, New York,
1978
Yang Liyi, 100 Chinese Idioms and Their Stories, Beijing Commercial
Press, Beijing, 1991.
Yu Hsiu Sen, Ancient Chinese Parables. The Commercial Press,
Shanghai, 1924.
Zou Zongxu. Susan Whitfield, Translator, The Land Within The Passes:
A History of Xian, Viking Press, London, 1987
                                                                 193
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
194
                                                                       Index
                                    Index
alchemist, 150, 151, 152                  Genghis Khan, 32
alchemy, 150                              Go Oaigo, 103
ambush, 8, 13, 22, 34, 35, 81, 136,       Gou Jian, 25, 26
   162, 172, 182                          Guo Jian, 26, 45, 106
armada, 35, 167, 174                      Han, 2, 13, 14, 27, 39, 40, 44, 56,
barbarians, 45, 76, 78, 141, 142             58, 67, 68, 72, 76, 80, 97, 99,
Cao Cao, 30, 31, 44, 45, 53, 54,             100, 101, 111, 119, 125, 126,
   68, 81, 91, 101, 143, 144, 167,           135, 137, 138, 141, 142, 149,
   168, 173, 174                             157, 158, 162, 171, 185, 191,
Cao Cui, 22                                  192
Chang Tuo, 18, 19                         Han Dynasty China, 13, 67, 72,
Chang Yi, 156, 157                           76, 80, 99, 111, 125, 126, 137,
Chao Xiong, 166                              141, 149, 157, 162
chariots, 176                             Han Xin, 13, 14, 40, 137, 138
Chu, 6, 7, 18, 19, 27, 39, 48, 56,        He Ruodun, 33
   57, 58, 59, 75, 76, 91, 96, 97,        Heian Period, 68, 85, 179
   99, 100, 110, 137, 138, 147,           Hojo Regency Japan, 45, 103,
   149, 156, 166, 167, 176, 177,             163
   182, 183                               Hong Kong, 3, 190, 200
Confucian, 1                              Hongwu, 132
Daidoji Yuzan, 113                        Hou Zhuwei, 27
Daoist, 184                               Huidi, 67, 132, 183, 184
Dong Zhuo, 158, 159, 160                  I-Ching, 3
Dowager Empress, 126                      Imagawa Yoshimoto., 40
Duke Wen, 14, 15, 96                      Ji Xingze, 24
Edo Period, 172                           Jia Lin, 165
Emperor Xuan, 24                          Jian Shu, 23
Fan Li, 51, 52, 106                       Jiang Kan, 167
Feng Xuan, 52                             Jiang Liang, 39
Five Dynasties Period, 98                 junks, 144, 174
folklore, 3, 4                            kendo, 152
fortified positions, 13, 73, 117,         Khitan, 98
   172                                    king of Wu, 25, 26, 76, 106, 144,
Fu Chai, 25                                  145
Fu Jian, 84, 120                          Kong Ming, 163
Fushu, 66                                 Kuai, 17, 18
Gaozu, 2, 39, 40, 58, 72, 99, 100,        Kubalai Khan, 49
   101, 125, 126, 157                     Kusunoki Masashige, 103
General Fu, 77                            Lao Zi, 33, 51, 147, 161
                                                                         195
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
Legendary Era, 92, 185                 Sekigahara, 63
Li Cuang, 162                          Seppuku, 172
Li Mu, 7, 8, 80, 119                   Shi Hui, 182
Li Suyuan, 98                          Sima Fa, 155
Linghu Chao, 36                        Sima Rangchu, 123
Liu Bei, 101, 102, 143                 Sima Yi, 162, 163
Liu Chang, 126, 127                    Six Dynasties Period, 27, 33, 77,
Lu, 21, 22, 67, 126, 127, 143, 144,       78, 84, 102, 120, 168
   149, 150, 158, 159, 160             Song, 31, 55, 56, 57, 58, 62, 78,
Lu Bu, 159, 160                           102, 103, 110, 111, 168, 185
Meng Zhang, 52                         Song Dynasty, 31, 62, 185
Minamoto, 179, 180                     Spring and Autumn Period, 21,
Minamoto Yoshinaka, 179                   22, 25, 123
Ming, 3, 59, 132, 133, 143, 144,       Spring And Autumn Period, 17,
   150, 162, 163, 183, 185                55, 75, 83, 96, 109, 113, 182
Miyamoto Musashi, 5, 61, 89, 105       Subede, 32
Momoyama Period, 63                    Sui Dynasty, 34, 131, 138, 185,
Mongols, 73, 116                          193
Mori Montanari, 107, 108               Sun Bin, 2, 12, 13, 83, 130, 135,
Muromachi Period, 40, 107                 137, 141, 142, 187
numerology, 3                          Sun Ce, 71, 72, 171, 172
Oda Nobunaga, 40, 41                   Sun Zi, 1, 11, 12, 17, 21, 25, 29,
Pang Juan, 12, 13, 130, 131, 136,         36, 37, 43, 51, 55, 61, 71, 75,
   137                                    78, 79, 117, 135, 165, 175, 181
Prince Heshi, 50                       Suye Harukata, 107, 108
Prince Huai, 49                        Tai Gong, 47, 95, 129, 155, 171
Qi, 2, 12, 21, 22, 27, 28, 33, 44, 52, Tai Wu, 168
   53, 55, 57, 91, 97, 114, 123,       Taira, 179, 180
   135, 136, 137, 149, 176, 177,       Taira Koremori, 179
   178, 179                            Taiwan, 3
Qin, 6, 7, 14, 15, 22, 23, 24, 27, 38, Takeda Shingen, 163
   39, 48, 49, 56, 57, 58, 62, 65,     Takuan Sōhō, 99
   66, 77, 84, 90, 91, 109, 110,       Tan Daoji, 2, 78
   117, 118, 119, 120, 123, 147,       Tang Dynasty, 36, 106, 185, 187
   148, 166, 167, 176, 177, 185,       The Art of War, 17, 21, 25, 29, 37,
   190                                    43, 55, 61, 71, 75, 79, 117, 135,
Qing, 3, 72, 176, 185, 191                165, 175, 181, 188, 192
Relaxation, 33                         The Art Of War, 1, 65, 175
Renzong, 49                            The Book of Five Rings, 5, 61, 89,
retreat, 7, 14, 22, 34, 49, 71, 73,       105
   75, 76, 96, 101, 102, 118, 120,     Three Kingdoms Period, 30, 44,
   147, 163, 172, 180, 181, 182           53, 67, 71, 81, 91, 101, 143,
samurai, 8, 41, 63, 113, 152, 153,        144, 158, 162, 167, 171, 173
   179
196
                                                                  Index
Tian Dan, 114, 115, 116, 177, 178,  Xiongnu, 7, 8, 72, 80, 81, 157, 158,
   179                                 162
Tian Ji, 12, 13                     Xun Xi,, 114
Tokugawa, 63, 64, 163, 164, 172     Yagyu Munenori, 65, 175
Tokugawa leyasu, 63, 163            Yamato Takeru, 92
Toyotomi Hideyoshi, 45, 63, 109     Yangtze River, 34, 148
Wang, 6, 7, 84, 85, 119, 145, 158,  Yin Ziqi, 83, 84
   159, 160, 183, 191, 193          Yuan, 23, 30, 32, 44, 45, 49, 58,
Warring States Period, 2, 6, 7, 12,    73, 81, 82, 91, 92, 116, 131,
   14, 18, 27, 38, 44, 48, 51, 52,     185
   79, 89, 97, 106, 110, 114, 117,  Yuan dynasty, 58
   119, 130, 135, 156, 166, 176,    Yuan Dynasty, 32, 49, 58, 73,
   177, 183, 185                       116, 185
Warrior, 1, 3                       Yuan Shao, 30, 44, 81, 91, 92
Wei, 2, 11, 12, 13, 14, 27, 44, 48, Zang Zhi, 168
   49, 55, 68, 79, 80, 81, 89, 90,  Zhang Fei, 101, 102
   91, 97, 101, 102, 103, 110, 111, Zhang Xun, 36, 84
   130, 131, 135, 136, 137, 144,    Zhao, 2, 11, 12, 13, 14, 27, 38, 55,
   149, 150, 158, 162, 163, 167,       56, 57, 58, 62, 63, 66, 76, 77,
   168, 173, 174, 193                  97, 110, 111, 117, 118, 119,
Wendi, 34, 102                         120
Xian Gu, 182, 183                   Zhao Kuo, 118
Xiang Liang, 147, 148               Zheng, 17, 18, 22, 23, 48, 109,
Xiang Yu, 39, 40, 56, 57, 58, 99,      110, 157
   100, 101, 148                    Zhou Yu, 143, 167, 168, 173, 174
Xing Yang, 97                       Zhuangzong, 138
                                                                    197
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
198
                            About the Author
About the Author
      Stefan H. Verstappen is a Canadian
      writer, world traveler, and martial
      artist. Verstappen has written eight
      books and dozens of articles for a
      variety of publications.
      For more information on the author
      visit: www.chinastrategies.com
                                         199
The Thirty-Six Strategies of Ancient China - S. H. Verstappen
               Other Books by Stefan Verstappen
                  A Masters Guide to The Way of the Warrior
                  A guide to advanced means and methods of the
                  warrior’s way
                  A Master’s Guide To The Way of the Warrior,
                  is a unique and comprehensive guide to applied
                  Eastern philosophy and the martial arts from a
                  scientific perspective.
                  The Art of Urban Survival:
                  A Family Safety and Self Defense Manual
                  The complete guide to survival in the concrete
                  jungle. The Art of Urban Survival offers safe,
                  and practical advice on how to prepare for, and
                  react to dozens of life threatening situations
                  Chinese Business Etiquette:
                  The Practical Pocket Guide
                  This essential pocket reference on common
                  business and social protocols for traveling and
                  doing business in China, Taiwan, and Hong
                  Kong, is ideal for anyone doing business with
                  the Chinese, at home or abroad.,
                  Blind Zen,
                  A Case Study of Sensory Enhancement for the
                  Blind
                  Blind Zen tells the story of how a blind
                  woman’s efforts to learn self-defense led to a
                  unique experiment to adapt martial arts and
                  eastern philosophy to develop new skills and
                  increase self-confidence.
200
