13. Random Walks
A drunk man will find his way home, but a drunk bird may get lost forever.
—Shizuo Kakutani
In this chapter, we learn two classic models from probability and statistics:
the Bernoulli urn model and the random walk model.1 Both models
describe random processes even if it may appear that they are producing
complex structures. Randomness can be hard to discern without gathering
data. We often think we see patterns in election outcomes, stock prices, and
scoring in sporting events, but instead, to borrow Nassim Taleb’s lovely
phrase, we are being fooled by randomness.2
The Bernoulli urn model describes random processes that produce discrete
outcomes, like the flip of a coin or the roll of a die. Developed centuries
ago to explain the odds of winning at gambling, it now occupies a central
position in probability theory. The random walk model builds on that model
by keeping running totals of the number of heads and tails. The model can
capture the movement of particles in liquids and gases, the movement of
animals in physical space, and growth in human height from birth to
childhood.3
The chapter begins with brief coverage of the Bernoulli urn model along
with an analysis of the length of streaks. We then describe the random walk
model. We learn that one-dimensional and two-dimensional random walks
return to their starting point infinitely often, while a three-dimensional
random walk need not return home at all. We also learn that the time
between returns to zero for a one-dimensional random walk will follow a
power-law distribution. This finding, which we might be tempted to
dismiss as a mathematical curiosity, can explain the life spans of species
and firms. In the final section, we use the random walk model to evaluate
the efficient market hypothesis and to determine the size of a network.

The Bernoulli Urn Model

The Bernoulli urn model consists of an urn containing gray and white balls.
Draws from the urn represent the outcomes of random events. Each draw is
independent of previous and future draws, so we can apply the law of large
numbers: in the long run, the proportion of balls drawn of each color will
converge to its proportion in the urn. That does not mean that a thousand
draws from an urn containing seven white balls and three gray balls will
produce exactly seven hundred white outcomes, only that the proportion of
white balls will converge to 70%.4

Bernoulli Urn Model
Each period, a ball is randomly drawn from an urn containing G gray and
W white balls. The outcome equals the ball’s color. The ball is returned to
the urn prior to the next period’s draw. Let image denote the proportion of
gray balls. Given N draws, we can calculate the expected number of gray
balls chosen, NG, and its standard deviation, σNG :
image
Outcomes in the Bernoulli urn model produce streaks of predictable
lengths. In an urn with equal numbers of gray and white balls, the
probability of drawing a white ball equals image. The probability of
drawing two consecutive white balls equals image times image. In
general, if a proportion P of the balls in the urn are gray, the probability of
drawing N consecutive white balls equals PN. By calculating probabilities,
we can assess whether a streak was likely, amazing, or so improbable that
we should expect fraud. When a basketball player makes a three-point shot
nine times in a row, does he have a hot hand, or should we expect a random
sequence of that length? The math shows that in a ten-year career, a good
three-point shooter would be as likely as not to make nine in a row.5
We can make similar calculations to decide whether an investor has been
lucky, good, or fraudulent. Berkshire Hathaway, the conglomerate run by
Warren Buffett, outperformed the market forty-two out of fifty years from
1965 to 2014. A dollar invested in Berkshire Hathaway in 1964 was worth
over $10,000 in 2016, while a dollar invested in the S&P 500 was worth

about $23. If Berkshire had a 50% chance of beating the market, it should
have outperformed the market twenty-five times during that fifty-year
period, with a standard deviation of 3.5 years image The actual number of
years Berkshire beat the market lies about four standard deviations above
the mean, a one-in-a-million event. We can rule out luck. Given that
Berkshire reveals its investments, we can also rule out fraud. Bernie
Madoff did not reveal his investments. His proclaimed streak of successes
—decades of consecutive positive returns—was so unlikely that his clients
should have demanded transparency.6

Random Walk Models
Our next model, the simple random walk model, builds on the Bernoulli urn
model by keeping running totals of past outcomes. We set the initial value,
the state of the model, to be zero. If we draw a white ball, we add 1 to the
total. If we choose a gray ball, we subtract 1. The state of the model at any
time equals the sum of the previous outcomes (i.e., the total number of
white balls drawn minus the number of gray balls drawn).

A Simple Random Walk
image
where Vt denotes the value of the random walk at time t, V0 = 0 and R(-1,
1) is a random variable that is equally likely to equal -1 or 1. The expected
value of a random walk in any period equals zero and has a standard
deviation of image, where t equals the number of periods.7
Figure 13.1 shows a simple random walk. The graph appears to have a
pattern: a long downward trend followed by an upward trend and then a
modest crash when the process crosses the zero line. That pattern happened
by chance.
A simple random walk is both recurrent (it returns to zero infinitely often)
and unbounded (it exceeds any positive or negative threshold). If we wait
long enough, a random walk exceeds 10,000 and falls below negative 1

million. It also crosses zero infinitely often. In addition, the distribution of
the number of steps required to return to zero satisfies a power law.8 Most
returns to zero occur in a few steps. Half of all walks return in two steps.
Other walks, though, take a long time to return. That must be true given the
unboundedness of random walks. A walk that crosses a threshold of 1
million would requires more than 2 million steps to reach that value and
then return back to zero.
image
Figure 13.1: Plot of a Simple Random Walk for 300 Periods
The power law distribution result has unexpected applications. If we model
firms’ sales (or employees) as a random walk, firm life spans will be a
power law. To be more precise, if we assume that when sales are strong, a
firm adds an employee, that when sales are poor, a firm fires an employee,
and that the firm closes when it no longer has employees, then the
distribution of return times will equal the distribution of firm life spans,
which will be a power-law distribution. And, to a first approximation, firm
life spans are a power law.9 We can apply the same logic to predict the life
spans of biological taxa (kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus, and
species). If the number of members of a taxon follow a random walk—for
example, if the number of species in a genus goes up and down randomly—
the taxon sizes should satisfy a power law. Here again, data are
supportive.10
We can apply the model as an analogy by thinking of the random walk as a
glacier moving along the ground. That model would predict that the
distribution of sizes of glacial lakes would satisfy a power-law distribution.
Each time the glacier falls below the land mass’s surface and returns to the
top, it creates a lake with a diameter that corresponds to the return time.
Once again, data roughly align.11
The basic random walk model can be modified in several ways. We can
create a normal random walk whose value in each period changes by an
amount drawn from a normal distribution. A normal random walk will not
return to zero exactly, though it will cross zero infinitely many times.

We can also make one outcome more likely than the other, producing a
biased random walk. We can use biased random walks to predict the odds
of winning in games of chance. In roulette, the probability of winning a bet
on a red outcome equals image.12 We can model the aggregate winnings
(or losses) of a sequence of bets as a random walk that increases by 1 with
probability image (about 47.4%) and decreases by 1 with probability
image. After 100 bets, the expected losses are $5 with a standard
deviation of $10. We can be 95% confident of losing no more than $25 and
winning no more than $15. After 10,000 bets, expected losses equal $526
with a standard deviation of 100. Therefore, 95% of the time we lose
between $325 and $725.13 Being ahead after10,000 equal bets is an event
more than five standard deviations above the mean, a less than one-in-amillion possibility. It follows that to win at roulette, a person should make
one big bet rather than many small bets.
Some sporting contests, such as basketball, can be modeled as two biased
random walks. Each team has a probability of scoring on each trip down
the court. That probability is estimated based on a profile of the team’s
offensive abilities and the opposing team’s defensive abilities. We model a
team’s trip down the court as a random event. Each team’s score
corresponds to the value of its random walk. The team with the higher
probability of scoring will be more likely to win. Analysis of data from the
NBA reveals a close match to the model. Scoring deviates from random
only when one team gains a huge lead, at which point the lead becomes
more likely to decrease than increase. This phenomena could be explained
by the winning team having less incentive to run up the score than the
losing team has to make the score respectable.14
If we watch basketball, the outcomes seem far from random. Intelligent,
athletic players run sophisticated offenses and make clutch plays. That is
true, but the effects of effort may wash out. Extra effort to score on offense
may be offset by extra effort on defense. A great steal may be wiped out by
a player sprinting the length of the court to block a layup from behind. The
model also suggests a strategy: stronger teams should speed up the game to
create more possessions. Favored teams would rather spin the roulette
wheel more often, as drift works to their advantage.

The simple random walk model takes place in a single dimension. We can
also model higher-dimensional random walks. A two-dimensional random
walk would begin at the origin in the plane, (0, 0), and then walk randomly
to the north, south, east, or west in each period. A two-dimensional random
walk resembles a squiggly line drawn on a sheet of paper. Two-dimensional
random walks also satisfy recurrence and unboundedness. Random search
will locate a lost earring in your living room. The mathematical fact of
recurrence enables random foraging as a strategy for ants.15 If the twodimensional random walk did not recur, ants would need more
sophisticated internal maps or stronger pheromone trails to find their nests.
In three dimensions, random walks do not satisfy recurrence. A fly
skittering around a room and a molecule bouncing in the air return to their
starting points a finite number of times—hence Kakutani’s quote about
drunken men and drunken birds at the start of this chapter.16
The lack of recurrence of random walks provides yet another example how
models can clarify our thinking. Intuition tells us that recurrence should
occur less often as we add dimensions. Logic reveals an abrupt change. In
one and two dimensions, a random walk returns to its origin infinitely
many times. In three dimensions, it wanders off forever. To arrive at that
type of result requires mathematics. Intuition alone will be insufficient.

Using Random Walks to Estimate Network
Size
We can exploit the recurrence of low-dimensional random walks to
estimate a network’s size. The method is straightforward. We select a node
at random, start a random walk along the edges of the network, and keep
track of how frequently it returns to the original node. The average time
between returns correlates with the network’s size. To estimate the size of a
social network, we could ask someone to name a friend, and then ask the
friend to name a friend. We could continue that process and keep track of
how often we return to the same person.
image

Figure 13.2: Random Walks on Networks
Figure 13.2 shows two networks. The network on the left has three nodes
forming a triangle. The network on the right has six nodes forming two
triangles. We can start a random walk on the left network at A. Suppose that
it moves to B, then C, and back to A. The random walk returns to its
starting point in three steps. On the network on the right, a random walk
starting at D might follow a seven-step path F − G − H − F − E − F − D.
If we repeat these experiments many times, the average return times on the
network on the left will be shorter. Though unnecessary for small networks
such as these, this method becomes useful on larger networks, like the
World Wide Web or large email networks.

Random Walks and Efficient Markets
Stock prices prove to be nearly normal random walks with a positive drift
to capture gains in the market. Many individual stock prices also are
approximately random. Figure 13.3 shows the daily stock price data for
Facebook for the year following its initial public offering on May 18, 2012.
Facebook was offered at $42 per share. By June 1, 2012, the price had
fallen to $28.89. One year later the price had fallen to $24.63. The figure
also shows a random walk calibrated to have similar variation.
image
Figure 13.3: Facebook Daily Stock Price June 2012–June 2013 vs. a
Random Walk
We can apply statistical tests to the sequence of Facebook share prices to
see if it satisfies the assumptions of a normal random walk. First, the price
should go up and down with equal probability. In the 249 trading days
covered, Facebook’s stock price went down on 127 days, or 51% of the
time. Second, in a random walk, the probability of an increase should be
independent of an increase that occurred in the previous period. Facebook’s
stock price moved in the same direction on consecutive days 54% of the
time. Finally, the expected longest streak of moves in the same direction
should be eight days. Facebook’s stock price went up on ten consecutive

days once during this period. Overall, we cannot reject the claim that
Facebook’s stock price is consistent with a normal random walk.
The same analysis can be done for daily prices in all stocks. To do so we
must first subtract the mean upward trend in stock prices. Studies show that
from the 1950s through the 1980s, daily stock prices had a slight positive
correlation. After detrending, the probability of an increase following an
increase exceeded image. From 1980 onward, as investors became more
sophisticated, the probability of an increase following an increase fell to
50%, consistent with a random walk. The reason stock prices might follow
a random walk pattern is that smart investors identify and therefore
eradicate patterns. For example, in the 1990s, analysts noticed that stock
prices rose at the beginning of each year, a phenomenon called the January
effect. Smart investors could buy stocks in December at low prices and sell
them in January for a profit. If that strategy seems too good to be true, it is.
If investors buy stocks in December, they raise prices, wiping out the
January effect. We should not be surprised that the January effect no longer
exists.
Economists draw an analogy between recognizable persistent patterns in
market prices and hundred-dollar bills on the sidewalk. If someone sees a
hundred-dollar bill, she picks it up. When she does, it goes away. The same
logic applies to patterns in stock prices: if they exist, they go away. A
market with smart investors will therefore contain few predictable price
patterns. If prices exhibit no pattern, what remains must be a random walk
(with the caveat that the general upward market trend must be subtracted
away).
Paul Samuelson wrote an early model that produced a random walk. His
model did not require that investors know the value of the stock in all
future periods, only that they know the distribution. As Samuelson himself
notes, “One should not read too much into the established theorem. It does
not prove that actual competitive markets work well.”17 Samuelson’s
reticence was not shared by everyone. Others extended this thinking to
create the efficient market hypothesis, which states that at any moment in
time the price of a stock captures all relevant information, and future prices
must follow a random walk. The efficient market hypothesis rests on

paradoxical logic.18 Determining an accurate price requires time and effort.
A financial analyst must gather data and construct models. If prices
followed a random walk, those activities would have no expected return.
However, if no one expends effort to estimate prices, then prices will
become inaccurate and the sidewalk will be covered in hundred-dollar bills.
In brief, the Grossman and Stiglitz paradox states that if investors believe
in the efficient market hypothesis, they stop analyzing, making markets
inefficient. If investors believe the market is inefficient, then they perform
analyses by applying models, making markets efficient.
In point of fact, price movements are rather close to random walks,
although sophisticated statistical techniques do reveal short-run patterns.19
While there may be no hundred-dollar bills on the sidewalk, there are some
four-leaf clovers in grassy fields that one can find by looking hard enough.
Critics of the hypothesis argue that some investors consistently win over
longer periods than would be predicted by chance.20 Furthermore, prices
could move randomly for some other reason, such as the aggregation of
sophisticated trading rules. Day-to-day price volatility exceeds the amount
of information that flows into markets, and the market takes huge jumps
and dives when little of relevance appears to be happening in the wider
world, suggesting the presence of bubbles. One person’s inconvenient facts
can be another person’s “these caveats notwithstanding.” Yes, volatility is
high, but small amounts of information can have large effects. And even
though the market does takes big jumps and dives, the market could still
follow a longer-tail random walk, where day-to-day movements come from
a longer-tailed distribution.
Though it seems implausible to think that stock prices are accurate at all
times, prices cannot diverge wildly from true values in the long run. We can
see this by applying the rule of 72. If the economy grew by 3% per year, in
half a century, the economy would increase 4-fold. If we go back to 1967,
the United States GDP equaled about $4.2 trillion (in 2009 dollars). By
2017, GDP had increased to almost $17 trillion (in 2009 dollars), a 4-fold
increase, exactly what we would expect given 3% growth. During that
same period, the real value of stocks in the S&P 500 also increased about

4-fold. Had the stock market risen at 12% per year (in real dollars), then
stock prices would have increased 256-fold, an impossibility.21
In the long run, assuming the efficient market hypothesis or something
close to it is a reasonable assumption. In the short run, betting on prices
correcting can be risky. The case of Long Term Capital Management
(LTCM), a hedge fund whose board of directors included two Nobel Prize
winners in economics, proves instructive. In 1996 and 1997, LTCM posted
returns in excess of 40% in part by identifying inefficiencies and predicting
the market would correct. In 1998, they noticed (correctly) that the price of
Russian bonds was out of alignment with prices of US Treasury bonds.
They bet big. However, a Russian default, the first since 1917, increased
the misalignment in the short term. LTCM lost $4.6 billion and nearly
caused a collapse of financial markets. Soon after LTCM was bailed out
bond prices did align, though not soon enough. The lesson should be
obvious: do not put too much faith in one model.

Summary
In this chapter, we learned the Bernoulli urn model and random walk
model. We applied these models widely. We saw how to distinguish
randomness from hot streaks, to develop strategies for gambling, to
evaluate time series of stock prices, and to make sense of outcomes in
basketball games. We also saw how to apply the power-law distribution of
return times for a random walk to inform our understanding of the duration
of firms and biological taxa.
From these applications, we see how the random walk model provides a
useful frame for evaluating time series. We should not be fooled by a few
years of success. It need not imply sustained excellence. In Good to Great:
Why Some Companies Make the Leap and Others Don’t, one of the bestselling business books of all time, Jim Collins identified characteristics of
consistently successful companies, such as having humble leaders, getting
the right people on the team, and maintaining discipline (what Collins
called “rinsing your cottage cheese” in homage to six-time Ironman
triathlon champion Dave Scott’s habit of rinsing his cottage cheese to
reduce the fat content). Collins singled out eleven great companies that kept

to his principles. In the decade following the publication of his book, only
one of the eleven produced strong growth. One was bought out. One was
taken over by the government, and the other eight generated zero returns.
The fact that the great firms shared attributes does not imply that those
attributes contribute to success. Perhaps the lowest-performing firms also
share those attributes. Selecting the best firms and looking at their attributes
is not model thinking. Model thinking would derive attributes that cause
success, such as talented workers. It would then test those conclusions
against data, and if possible look for natural experiments—instances where
the relevant attributes change randomly. Other models, such as the dancing
and rugged landscape models we cover in Chapter 28, call into question
Collins’ core assumptions. If the economy is complex, traits that prove
successful today need not work in the future. What creates great success
now—big rocks first—may not be a good strategy in ten years. As a rule,
we should apply many models before making broad pronouncements, lest
we risk correspondingly large errors. We should also avoid being fooled by
patterns. What appears to be a trend might well be random.

